Project Gutenberg's The Marquis of Letoriere, by Marie Joseph Eugène Sue

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: The Marquis of Letoriere

Author: Marie Joseph Eugène Sue

Release Date: November 22, 2020 [EBook #63852]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MARQUIS OF LETORIERE ***




Produced by Laura Natal Rodrigues at Free Literature (Images
generously made available by Hathi Trust.)






THE

MARQUIS OF LETORIERE.


[_FROM THE FRENCH._]



BOSTON:
NICHOLS & HALL

1873




CONTENTS

CHAPTER I
The Tailor
CHAPTER II
The Ex-Professor of Plessis College
CHAPTER III
The Debtor
CHAPTER IV
Mysteries
CHAPTER V
The Cavalier
CHAPTER VI
Mademoiselle de Soissons
CHAPTER VII
The Lawsuit
CHAPTER VIII
The Chateau Soubise
CHAPTER IX
The Departure
CHAPTER X
The Governor of Henferester
CHAPTER XI
The Supper
CHAPTER XII
Confidences
CHAPTER XIII
Doctor Sphex
CHAPTER XIV
The Councillor Flachsinfingen
CHAPTER XV
The Interview
CHAPTER XVI
The Judgment
CHAPTER XVII
The Adieux
CHAPTER XVIII
The Return
CHAPTER XIX
The Duel
CHAPTER XX
The Abbey




THE MARQUIS OF LETORIERE.




CHAPTER I

THE TAILOR


In 1769 there was in the Rue St. Honoré, not far from the Palais Royal,
a small tailor's shop, having for its sign an enormous pair of gilt
scissors, suspended above the door by an iron triangle.

Master Landry, proprietor of The Golden Scissors, a little lean, pale,
and apathetic man, offered a striking contrast to his wife Madelaine.

She was a woman of thirty-five or forty years, robust and active, with
hard features, and a gait like a man's, and her quick and imperious
voice told that her dominion over her household was absolute.

It was eleven o'clock one dark, rainy day in December. Master Landry,
seated on his counter, plied alternately his scissors and needle, in
company with Martin Kraft, his apprentice, a big, heavy, phlegmatic
German, about twenty years old, whose red and puffed-out cheeks, and
long hair, more yellow than blonde, gave him a stupid air.

The tailor's wife seemed to be in a very bad humor. Landry and his
apprentice maintained a prudent silence, until at length Madeleine
snapped out at her husband, scornfully:

"I give up; thou hast no blood in thy veins; thou would'st allow thyself
to be robbed of thy last customer; imbecile!"

Landry exchanged an elbow-touch and a glance with Martin Kraft, but kept
quiet, handling his needle with redoubled dexterity.

Irritated, no doubt, by the meekness of her victim, the housewife
resumed, addressing her husband vehemently:

"To whom do I speak, if you please?"

The tailor and the apprentice continued mute.

The exasperated woman administered a vigorous slap to her husband,
saying:

"It appears to me that when I speak to a fool, it is thou whom I
address, and thou would'st do well to reply--ill-bred as thou art!"

"By St. Genevieve!" cried the tailor, putting his hand to his cheek, and
turning to his apprentice,--"how's that, Kraft?"

The apprentice answered only by a violent stroke of his iron goose,
applied to the seams of a coat; but this blow had such an expression of
temper, that Dame Landry, with a dexterous hand, inflicted on the
phlegmatic German the same correction she had applied to Landry, saying
to him:

"I'll teach you to censure my conduct, you sluggard!"

"How do you find that, Master Landry?" said the apprentice, in his turn,
looking towards his master.

The latter, hoping to allay his wife's irritation, said, very calmly:

"Now, Madelaine, explain yourself tranquilly; we are both sufficiently
roused to pay attention to what you would say."

"That's lucky; what I have to say will not take long. Idler,
good-for-nothing! see now, one of your best customers, the
valet-de-chambre of the Member of Parliament, no less a personage, has
gone to our neighbor Mathurin."

"What, we're losing our custom?" demanded the tailor of his apprentice
with an air of indignation, coward-like, designing to turn the wrath of
his wife on the unhappy Kraft. "What, Martin, do you give us such
customers? Are you not ashamed? 'Tis not mine who treat us thus.
Gracious! mine are as faithful to me as the thread to the needle--as the
thimble to the finger--as--"

"Tut, tut, tut," said Dame Landry, interrupting, "how you chatter,
Master Landry! That's the reason why the clerk of M. Buston, the
attorney at Châtelet, who has always been your customer, left you more
than a month ago--even he--for that cursed Mathurin!"

"What do you mean, woman? This Mathurin surely must employ some sorcery
thus to draw those customers to his shop," said Landry, sadly; "for I
defy any workman of the honorable corporation of tailors to do better or
stronger sewing than mine. St. Genevieve, patroness of our good city,
knows if I cabbage the thousandth part of a quarter of a yard of the
cloths which are intrusted to me. It is the same with the trimmings;
and--"

"Heavens! M. Landry, give me rest from the enumeration of your good
qualities. Our neighbor Mathurin is a knave, a cheat it may be; but at
least he bends his wits to his work, he bestirs himself; he makes good
acquaintances; he does not sit all day with his arms crossed as you do."

"Excuse me, it is his legs, madame, which Master L. keeps crossed all
day," said Kraft, sententiously.

"Hear that animal!" cried the housewife, throwing a meaning look at the
apprentice, who lowered his head and began to work furiously with his
goose.

"You have no good customers," said Dame Landry, "none but mechanics,
attorneys' clerks, dry-salters workmen--not a single gentleman."

"As for gentlemen, Madelaine," replied the tailor, hazarding a timid
reproach, "I have one among my customers, and you prevent me from
working for him."

Madelaine colored with anger, and exclaimed: "Do you dare to talk to me
of your Marquis, of your _Monsieur le Charmant_, of that sharper, who
has owed us three hundred livres for more than a year, and from whom you
have never got the first red cent?"

"And yet, ma'am, you wish the custom of such gentlemen!"

"I wish the custom of gentlemen who pay, and not of knaves who only walk
the streets of Paris, with swords at their sides, and hats cocked awry,
to dupe imbeciles like you,--poor trades-people like us."

The tailor raised his hands towards heaven.

"It is easy to see, Madelaine, that you are no better acquainted with
the Marquis than with the Grand Turk. . . . He, a knave; he, a sharper;
he--poor young man--so mild, so gentle, so sad, and then so pretty . . .
one could spend an hour only in looking at him . . . he is like a wax
saint."

"So pretty--so pretty," said the housewife, imitating her husband,
". . . and what does that amount to? Did any one ever see such folly?
Does he pay us any better because he is pretty? Once more, what good has
it done you?"

"This is what it does for me: when I see such a handsome gentleman, poor
and unhappy . . . I am heart-broken, and I have not the courage to ask
for my money. . . . That is what it does for me. In short, Martin Kraft
himself has felt as I do. . . . You sent him to the house of the Marquis
to dun him, and what did Martin Kraft tell you when he came back? That
instead of demanding the money, he had asked him if he did not need a
new coat."

"That only proves that Martin Kraft is a goose like yourself!"

"The fact is, that this gentleman was so beautiful that one would have
said he was a wooden figure painted at Nuremburg," gravely said the
German, who could find no more artistic comparison to express his
admiration.

"Well done!" said Dame Landry, contemptuously shrugging her shoulders;
then adding, "but patience, patience! this very day I will go and show
this charming gentleman that Madelaine Landry does not take her pay in
wheedling."

Just then a carriage stopped before the shop. It was raining in
torrents. The housewife put on a more amiable expression, thinking that
custom might come from the coach; but, to her great astonishment, the
coachman, having descended slowly and clumsily from his seat, looked at
the sign and entered the tailor's shop.

"Master Landry?" he asked, in a loud voice, shaking his great-coat all
dripping with rain.

"At least, there is no need of your shaking yourself like a dog coming
out of the water in order to ask for Master Landry," sharply answered
Madelaine. "What do you want?"

"My good woman, if I shake myself it is because I am soaked--drowned--as
you can see, and I only give you a drop or two."

"Much obliged for your kindness," said the housewife.

"As to Master Landry, I wish to speak to him about a young
gentleman . . . Zounds! what a charming little gentleman! As true as my
name is Jerome Sicard, I never saw such a beauty.--Come now," said the
coachman, interrupting himself, "see how the water is running down my
neck," and he began to shake his hat.

Dame Madelaine was bursting out anew, when the window of the carriage
was lowered. A man about fifty years of age, large, coarse, rubicund,
powdered, and clothed in black, called to the coachman in the voice of a
Stentor. Seeing that his summons was unheeded, he opened the door, got
out of the carriage, and entered the shop.

"Will you tell me, you stupid, why you have stopped here instead of
carrying me to the Soubise Hotel?"

"Excuse me sir; I had to execute a commission for a fine
gentleman." . . . .

"And what is that to me,--your fine gentleman? I'm in a hurry. Come, get
on the box." . . . .

"One minute, 'squire; I have promised this gentleman to execute his
commission, and do it I will."

"Ah, you refuse to go! Take care! if you don't start immediately, you
shall hear from the lieutenant of police--I give you warning."

"All right, I shall have to pass a night in the lock-up, if you
choose,--you have the right to put me there; but I will keep my promise
to this young gentleman."

After new entreaties and new threats, seeing that he made no impression
on the obstinacy of the coachman, the big man clothed in black, who was
the steward of the Princess of Rohan-Soubise, seated himself, growling.

"But," cried the peevish Madelaine, pulling Sicard by the sleeve, "are
you ever going to say what you have to say to my husband?" And she
pointed to Landry, who had looked on the whole scene with open mouth.

"This is the story," said the coachman; "I was passing, an hour ago,
through a street in the Faubourg St. Honoré. It rained in torrents. I
saw, under the porch of the Hotel Pompadour, a young man who had taken
shelter there. He was so lovely . . . one would have taken him for a
good angel . . . Although it is the middle of winter, he had on a poor
coat of brown cloth trimmed with black lace!!!"

"A coat of brown cloth with black trimmings! That is our coat!" cried
Dame Landry; "that is to say, it is _Monsieur le Charmant_; it is that
cursed marquis; he has only that coat which we have made him on credit
. . . it is easy enough to recognize him."

"Yes, faith, if ever any one deserved to wear embroidered coats, it is
surely he, for as sure as my name is Jerome Sicard, I never saw any one
who looked more like a good angel". . .

"Bah, go away with your good angel! . . . Has he given you money to
bring to us? Where are the three hundred livres that he has owed us for
more than a year?"

"Money! Goodness gracious! No, indeed, he has not sent it! Who would
have the heart to ask it of him? I took him to the Palais Marchand for
nothing." . . .

"Well, wife"--said the tailor, with a triumphant air.

"Hold your tongue, you fool . . . he has cheated this coachman as he has
bewitched and cheated you . . . another proof that he is a rogue."

"Rogue!" cried the worthy Sicard, stamping his foot angrily . . . . "A
cheat! Know, my gossip, that this gentleman cheats no one . . . . If I
carried him for nothing it was because it gave me pleasure to do so.
Seeing him stopped by the rain, I drew my carriage up to the door and
said to him, 'Get in, sir!' 'No, thank you my lad,' he answered, in a
voice sweet as music. 'But you will be wet to the skin.' 'That is very
possible; but tell me only, my friend, what time it is.' 'Eleven
o'clock, sir.' 'Eleven o'clock! and I have business at the Palais
Marchand at half-past eleven,' exclaimed he, involuntarily looking sadly
at the rain and the gutters, which were running like rivers. 'Get in,
then, sir,' I repeated; 'in twenty minutes I will set you down at the
Palais Marchand, while on foot it will take you at least until noon to
get there!' 'I thank you, my lad,' said he, half-smiling, half-sighing,
'but I have no money. So don't lose your time here!' 'No money!' I
cried, opening the door, and almost pushing the little gentleman into my
carriage, for he was slender as a reed. 'By Jupiter, it shall not be
Jerome Sicard, who, for a franc, leaves a gentleman like you to miss an
appointment! Take my number, and you may pay me when you like, sir;' and
without giving him time to answer, I jumped on my seat, and in eighteen
minutes I deposited him safely at the Palais Marchand."

"Well done! he has bewitched everybody, even a hackney-coachman," cried
Dame Landry; "but patience--patience!"

"Shall you soon be done?" cried out the steward of the Princess Soubise.

"In one moment, sir. Arrived at the Palais Marchand, my gentleman said,
'Give me your number, my lad, I only desire to have the power to
recognize your kindness some day, and to pay you as you deserve; for
without your help, I could not have been present at an audience very
important to my lawsuit; but, as you have been so obliging, do me yet
one more favor. I started to go to my tailor to tell him not to fail to
bring me the coat which he promised me for to-night. This tailor keeps
in St. Honoré, at the sign of The Golden Scissors. If it will not take
you too much out of your way to pass this shop and tell the tailor that
the Marquis--Let--Les--Létorière--yes, that's it--of Létorière, will
expect this evening the coat he took the measure for a fortnight since.'
'Whether it is out of my way or not,' said I, 'I will go at any rate.'
Then you hired me by the hour, sir;" and the coachman, turning towards
the steward, added: "I have passed through St. Honoré, which has not
put you out at all, and I have executed my commission to this worthy
knight of the thimble and needle." Turning to Landry: "Now, tailor,
don't forget the gentleman's coat, and if you will tell me at what hour
it will be ready, I will come and carry it to his house myself, gratis.
Zounds!--always gratis--for I am sure that to oblige any one who so much
resembles a good angel ought to give one happiness. Now, my master,
excuse me"--and he turned towards the steward of Madame
Rohan-Soubise--"when you are ready we will start."

The steward, witness of this singular scene, felt interested in spite of
himself; he did not hurry in getting into the coach, especially when he
heard Dame Landry cry, in a cross voice, regarding her husband with
surprise and astonishment:

"Have you then dared, in spite of my orders, to promise another coat to
this person who never pays? But you have not begun it, I hope?"

"But, my dear--"

"There is no but about it,--answer me!"

"I have done more than begin it, my dear; I have finished it," said the
tailor, sadly lowering his head.

"You have made this coat? And with what? And when? Why don't you answer
me? For the last week I have not seen you, you and your worthy
apprentice, working on anything but these woollen overcoats and these
shaggy jackets."

Wishing to come to his master's succor, Master Kraft ventured to say:
"It was I, Madame Landry, who bought, with my own savings, five yards of
Segovian cloth, of an amaranth color, and in order to make the garment
complete, three yards of changeable taffeta, for the trimming of the
vest and coat; and we have worked nights, Master Landry and I, in order
that we might not lose our work by day."

"So, while I have been quietly and honestly sleeping, you have been
sitting up like criminals to work upon this beautiful masterpiece!"
cried the housewife.

"Well, what'll you have? This poor little gentleman has not troubled
either of us, Martin Kraft. By St. Genevieve! it was pitiful to see him,
in midwinter, with his miserable brown coat. We could not resist the
pleasure of clothing him like a gentleman as he is. Be easy; sooner or
later he will pay us. I'll put my hand in the fire if he isn't as honest
as he is charming."

Jerome Sicard, a big fellow of thirty years or thereabouts, listened to
the tailor's speech with increasing satisfaction. When it was finished,
he offered Master Landry his great hand, saying: "Take it, worthy
tailor; send your wife immediately to get a bottle of your best wine,
and we will drink together--blast me if we don't! And you, too, worthy
apprentice I you, also, shall share the bottle, for you honor the
scissors and the establishment better than any of your respectable
corporation."

"If you don't drink wine till I bring it to you, you will run no risk of
losing the little wits you have left," said Dame Landry, sharply; "you
deserve, indeed, to hob-nob with my fool of a husband, for, like him,
you have let yourself be bewitched by the first knave who comes along.
But as you do so well the errands of this cheating Marquis, you can go
and tell him that the coat shall not go out of this shop until he has
paid us the three hundred livres that he owes. You can also inform him,
to finish up the matter, that I am going myself to carry his bill, and
if the fine gentleman is not at home I will wait for him,--if he does
not, at least, give me something on account, I will go and find the
commissary, and I'll let you see that I, a woman, have more spunk than
either of you,--you chicken-hearted milk-sops!"

"As to being a sop, I'm sopping wet, that's true enough," said Jerome
Sicard; "but as to being chicken-hearted,--my good granny, if I had my
whip, or only the yard-stick on the counter, and you were _my_ wife, I'd
teach you speedily that I am no chicken, but a full-grown cock--fully
able to teach you better than to refuse a flask of wine to my
friends . . . all this without malice . . . but may the good God
grant that this may give you the happy idea of using your yard-stick
in training your wife, brave tailor!" said Sicard; then addressing
the secretary,--"I am ready, sir."

"That is well," said he, though by no means angry at the detention, for
the scene had amused him.

The coachman gone, Dame Landry took her large cloak, her black mantle,
and a great umbrella, bade her husband bring her the coat of Segovian
cloth made for M. Létorière, which she locked up, and then started in
a white heat of wrath to go and wait for this _Monsieur le Charmant_, as
she derisively called him.




CHAPTER II

THE EX-PROFESSOR OF PLESSIS COLLEGE


The dwelling of the Marquis was not very far from his creditor's shop.
M. de Létorière occupied two small rooms on the fifth floor of a house
in the Rue St. Florentin.

He shared this poor asylum with Dr. Jean-François Dominique,
ex-professor in the College of Plessis.

By an odd freak of fortune, the young Marquis, destined to charm people
in so many conditions of life, had first exercised his inconceivable
fascinations on this old professor, who was drawn to him with the most
tender affection.

Notwithstanding a thousand malicious tricks of the frolicsome child,
Dr. Dominique recognized in his pupil so much spirit and heart, as well
as nobility of soul, that he became singularly attached to him. Perhaps,
also, the rare aptitude of the Marquis, who was one of the most
distinguished linguists of the Plessis College, for the study of the
dead languages, was another reason for the extraordinary devotion of the
old professor to his pupil.

The Abbé of Vighan, an uncle of M. de Létorière, had for six years
paid the college expenses of his nephew, a poor orphan. During a journey
of the Abbé, the balance of the quarterly account was left in arrears.
The Marquis interpreting, in a manner displeasing to his delicacy, some
words of the principal on the subject of this tardiness in the payment,
resolutely decided to quit the college.

Dominique, acquainted with his project, did his best to dissuade him
from its execution; but the Marquis was nineteen years of age, and had a
determined will. The poor professor, not being able to prevent him from
committing this folly, determined at least to accompany him in his
flight, so unwilling was he to leave the young Marquis to encounter
alone the temptations of a great city.

Dominique himself made all the plans for the escape; and one dark night
the master and scholar scaled the walls of the college, not without
danger to the old professor, little used to this kind of exercise.

The principal of the college, satisfied, perhaps, to be rid of a
mutinous and turbulent pupil, took no steps to arrest the fugitive.
Létorière possessed fifteen louis-d'or; Dominique had a little income
of fifty pistoles from the salt tax; these were their only pecuniary
resources.

The Marquis's father had left nothing to his son save two or three
interminable lawsuits. The most important of these, which had lasted
fifty years, had been instigated against the dukes of Brunswick-Oëls
and the princes of Brandebourg-Bareuth, on the subject of the claims of
a grand-aunt of M. de Létorière, Mademoiselle d'Olbreuse, who, at the
time of the revocation of the Edict of Nantes, had emigrated and married
one of the relations of the Duke of Brunswick.

A poor gentleman of Xaintonge, without influential friends and without
credit, Létorière despaired of ever carrying on the lawsuit upon which
depended the fortune that he could not hope to enjoy; twenty times on
the point of enlisting and becoming a soldier, the persuasions of the
good Dominique had withheld him.

The ex-professor of Plessis had carefully examined the papers of these
lawsuits. For love of his pupil he had become almost a lawyer. The
rights of the Marquis appeared to him evident; nothing was needed, he
said, but patience, and some day the suits would indubitably be gained.

More and more enthusiastic in his admiration of the Marquis, he boldly
compared him to Alcibiades, so seductive was his fascination. Jean
François Dominique modestly reserved to himself the austere part of
Socrates, and did not cease to predict the most brilliant fortune for
his pupil.

"But, my poor Dominique," the young man would say, "I have only my cloak
and my sword,--no protector; but for you I should be alone in the
world."

"But you are _charmant_, my child; all must love you as soon as they see
you; all cherish you as soon as they know you, on account of your good
and generous nature; you have talent; you know Latin and Greek as well
as I do; you understand German as your native tongue, thanks to your
late father, who caused you to be brought up by a German valet; you are
a noble gentleman, although you do not trace your lineage back to
Euryales, son of Ajax, as did Alcibiades, whom I call my hero, because
you resemble him extremely. Have patience, then; your career will
perhaps be more brilliant than my hero's. . . Yes, it will surely
be! . . . as true as that Socrates saved the life of his pupil at
Potidæa! But I know your heart, and I am sure that when you are on the
pinnacle of prosperity you will not forget the old Jean-François
Dominique, as Alcibiades forgot the old philosopher!"

However odd and foolish these predictions may have seemed to the young
Marquis, they sufficed for a long time to sustain his courage, to give
him some hope of gaining one of his lawsuits, and above all, to prevent
his enlisting as a private soldier, as he had often threatened to do, to
the great alarm of Dominique.

Madelaine Landry soon reached the Rue Florentin. Having mounted the five
flights of stairs which led to the apartments of her debtor, she stopped
a moment on the landing-place to recover breath, in order that she might
give free expression to her wrath.

When she had sufficiently recovered from her rapid ascent, she knocked;
the door was opened.

To her profound astonishment, a frightfully ugly man appeared before
her.

This was the ex-professor of Plessis. Jean-François Dominique was about
fifty years old; he was large and bony; his lean face, pale, and very
long, bore traces of the ravages of small-pox; his thin, gray hair was
tied at the back of his head with a piece of tape. An old woollen
coverlet, in which he had majestically draped himself, served him as a
dressing-gown. His countenance wore an expression of pedantic surliness
and of self-satisfaction in strange combination.

The aspect of the room which he occupied was forlorn, but everything in
it was scrupulously clean. At the end of the alcove was a little bed,
composed of a single mattress; a commode, a table, and four walnut
chairs, carefully waxed, completed the furniture. The open door of a
small adjoining room showed a bed of neatly-woven thongs. Although the
weather was extremely cold, there was no trace of fire in the fireplace
of this wintry chamber. At the foot of the painted wooden couch were two
little pastel portraits, in rich gilt frames. One represented a man of
middle age, wearing a wig of the Louis XIV. style, and having the cross
of the Order of St. Louis attached to one of the clasps of his
breastplate. The other was that of a lady of rare beauty, dressed as
Diana the huntress.

There was recognizable in this room an air of proud poverty, which would
have softened any female heart but that of Madelaine Landry.

"Does not _one_ M. Létorière live here?" she inquired brusquely of the
tall old man, clad with a woollen coverlet as with a Roman toga.

These words, "one M. Létorière," seemed to affect the ex-professor of
Plessis College disagreeably. He answered with caustic dignity: "I only
know that the great and powerful Lord Lancelot-Marie-Joseph de Vighan,
Seigneur of Marsailles and Marquis of Létorière, lodges in this
apartment, my good woman."

"'Good woman!' Don't 'good woman' me!" cried Madelaine, angrily, "I'll
let you know, I will, if I'm a 'good woman!' Where is your master, your
beautiful Marquis of Sharpers? your high and powerful seigneur of
Roguery?"

Jean François Dominique drew himself up erect in his toga, extended his
long arm, naked and scrawny, from the side of the door, and said in an
imperial voice: "Clear out this instant! The Marquis, my noble pupil,
has not come in . . . I do not know when he will return . . . but at any
rate I presume it will give him no pleasure to see you, my dear . . .
for if anger disfigures the most charming countenances, as says the
sage, _à fortiori_, it makes truly hideous those whom nature has
treated like a cruel step-mother! This applies particularly to you. Do
me the favor to" . . . and Dominique pointed again to the door with a
very significant gesture.

Enraged by this insult, the tailor's wife threw her umbrella on the
ground, seated herself hastily on a chair, crying: "'Tis well for you,
you villanious old owl . . . to speak of the homeliness of others! This
fine boy is your pupil, is he? Good gracious, I can readily believe it,
for you look like a master in iniquity. You miserable old wretch! As for
me, I shall not budge . . . not till I am paid . . . do you hear?
_paid_; or by St. Madelaine, my patron saint, if I go, it will only be
to search for a constable . . ."

"Aha! Paid, and for what, if you please?" demanded Dominique.

"I wish to be paid for the coat which your vagabond has on his
back . . . I am the wife of Master Landry, the tailor at The Golden
Scissors; and if my husband has been fool enough to give you credit until
now, I will not be fool enough to imitate him . . . I will have my
money . . . I will not go from here without my money . . ."

"How!" cried Dominique, folding his arms with the most disdainful air
imaginable; "is it for such a miserable trifle that you come to crack my
ears with your frightful chatter,--for this that you come to torment the
Marquis? Do you forget that once all the cities of Greece were disputing
the honor of offering their services to Alcibiades, that the Ephesians
pitched his tents? that the men of Chios fed his horses? that the
Lesbians supplied his tables? and all _gratis_, do you understand,
_gratis_; all, only that they might have the honor of offering something
to Alcibiades? And you, you miserable workwoman, for three hundred
insignificant livres, not the tenth part of a talent! for a paltry sum
owed you by the Marquis, my pupil, who is, or who will be, a very
different person from Alcibiades, you come screeching here like an
osprey! But, you old fool, you may, on the contrary, bless the day when
my pupil deigned to cast his eye on your ignoble workshop! Remember,
also, that the shoe-maker of Athens, who had the good luck to work for
Alcibiades, made more money in a year than you will gain in your whole
miserable life. Do you hear that?"

Madelaine Landry, seeing the rage of this big man wrapped in a coverlet,
thought herself in the presence of a lunatic.

"But at any rate you have brought the coat that the Marquis did your
husband the honor to order," resumed Dominique. "Take good care that he
redoubles his diligence and dexterity to perfect this garment, for on it
depends all his future business prosperity; and if it suits my pupil,
your husband's fortune is made . . . Come, let's see the coat!" And
Dominique advanced gravely towards Madelaine.

She rose hastily from her chair, resolved to jump at the eyes of the
maniac, as she thought him.

"Don't come near me, or I will hit you over the head with my umbrella!"
she cried.

"You are a fool, my dear woman . . . Who thinks of hurting you? So you
have not brought the coat?" he continued, in a milder tone.

"What! have I brought the coat?--impudence!" said Madelaine, a little
gaining courage,--"certainly not; I have not brought it; and it is no
fault of mine that your pupil has on his back the one that my fool of a
husband sold him, and for which I come to be paid; for, I repeat it, I
am not going away until I am paid . . . If I am not paid, there is yet,
God be thanked, such a place as the lock-up to put rogues into . . .
When one hasn't the wherewith to pay for fine clothes, Marquis though he
may be, he ought to wear coarse clothes, and not steal the time and
goods of poor working-people."

At this moment light steps were heard ascending the stairs.

"That is the Marquis!" said Dominique.

"Ah! now we shall have good sport," cried Dame Madelaine.

"My dear woman," said Dominique--this time in a supplicating
voice--"spare him; on my word, you shall be paid."

"Pshaw! Now we shall see him--this smuggling Marquis."

The door was gently opened, and the Marquis appeared.

"I have not courage enough to witness this scene," said the trembling
Dominique, and he shut himself up in his dark chamber.




CHAPTER III

THE DEBTOR


At sight of the Marquis, Madelaine drew herself up like a fighting-cock,
and cast her eyes, flashing with anger, on the young man.

The Marquis of Létorière was then about twenty years of age. The
portraits we have of him, and the unanimous witness of his
contemporaries, agree in representing him as the type of the most
seductive ideality.

At this age, his proportions of exquisite elegance resembled rather the
Grecian god of love than Antinous.

All the treasures of antique statuary did not offer, it is said,
anything comparable to the harmonious beauty of his form. Under this
charming envelope nature had hidden muscles of steel, the courage of a
lion, a brilliant wit, a lofty soul, and a generous heart.

His enchanting countenance was not of a severe and masculine beauty; but
one could imagine nothing more pleasing,--and the pleasing was then
wonderfully to the purpose. Great size and herculean strength were then
out of place, since coats of mail were no longer worn. A dignified and
grave air would have been out of date, when the imposing leonine wigs of
the age of Louis XIV. were no longer in fashion.

If Létorière wore with such a charming effect rose-powder, laces,
ribbons, silk, and precious stones, it was because all his features, all
his manners, were endowed with a grace almost feminine, admirably in
accordance with the almost effeminate elegance of the costume and
ornaments of gentlemen of that period. If he possessed the art of
pleasing and seducing in the highest degree, it was because his
ravishing countenance could express, by turns, finesse, mockery,
haughtiness, audacity, tenderness and melancholy.

According to the witnesses of his time, his expression and the tone of
his voice had an especial charm, and an irresistible power, which the
partisans of a new science would undoubtedly attribute to magnetic
attraction.

But at the epoch of which we speak, he was only a poor young man, and,
_magnetic_ or not, his attraction was put to a severe test by the
tailor's wife.

Madelaine Landry felt her choler rising at sight of her debtor.

Létorière was soaked by the rain; his hands were blue with cold, and
his forehead almost hidden by the wet curls of his beautiful chestnut
hair, which he then wore without powder.

When he saw Madelaine, he could not repress a look of astonishment and
chagrin; yet he saluted her politely, and, bending on her his great
black eyes, at once so sad and soft, he said, in his brilliant and
harmonious voice:

"What do you wish of me, Madame?"

"I wish you to pay me for the coat on your back, for it belongs to
me--to me and my husband, Landry, tailor _to the Marquis_"--replied
Madelaine, with a sharp voice, insolently staring at her debtor.

A blush of shame colored the young man's cheeks, and a movement of
bitter impatience contracted his eyebrows; but he repressed his emotion,
and replied mildly:

"Unhappily I cannot pay you yet, madame."

"You cannot pay me! that is easy enough said: but I do not take such
money;--when one has nothing to pay for his coats, he should not have
them made. . . . I will not go from here until I have my money;" . . .
and Madelaine Landry rudely seated herself, while Létorière remained
standing.

"Listen to me, madame. . . . In one month from now I have the certainty
of being able to pay you; I give you my word as a gentleman. . . . Only
have the goodness to grant me a little delay, . . . I pray you." . . .

These words, _I pray you_, were pronounced with an inflexion of voice so
noble and touching, that Madelaine, already struck by ill-fortune so
courageously borne, feared she should give way to pity. She meant to
burn her ships, and answered the prayer of her debtor with a gross
insult:

"A fine guarantee, your word of a gentleman! What should I do with
that?"

"Madame!" cried the Marquis; then restraining himself, he spoke in a
sad, yet proud tone: "Madame, it is cruel in you to speak to me
thus . . . you are a woman . . . I owe you money . . . I am in my own
house . . . what can I answer you? Then do not seek to render more painful
my position, which is such as I hope you may never experience."

"But you will have no more money at the end of a month than now," said
Madelaine, harshly. "It is a fib you are telling me."

"If within a month my uncle, the Abbé of Vighan, to whom I intend to
apply, does not return from Hanover, I will enlist as a soldier, and my
bounty-money shall be faithfully remitted to you. . . . You see, madame,
that I can give you my word as a gentleman that you shall be paid."

The Marquis spoke of this desperate resolution with so much dignity, and
with an accent so sincere, that Madelaine, moved, repented of having
gone so far, and replied:

"I do not wish to force you to enlist; but I must be paid. This has
lasted long enough; sell something, . . . then." . . .

"Sell something here, madame?" and with a sorrowful look he pointed to
his poor chamber, cold and bare.

At this gesture, so cruelly significant, Madelaine cast down her eyes:
her heart hardened; then she added, stammering, and pointing to the two
gilt frames:

"But those two pictures?" . . .

"Those pictures?" said the Marquis, gravely and tenderly, "that is all
that remains to me of my father,--of my mother. . . . Madame, those are
their portraits, and for the first time they see their son blush for his
poverty." . . .

At these last words, Madelaine compared the interior of her own house,
where there was at least comfort, with this cold room, a miserable
shelter for a gentleman (for they stall believed in gentlemen at that
time); she felt her wrath soften almost to pity, especially when she saw
the young Marquis trembling with cold in his wet clothes.

In these violent natures, opposite emotions are near neighbors. Dame
Landry, since she left the shop, had been kept in a state of almost
frantic irritation; this paroxysm could not last; like all exaggerated
feelings, her anger fell flat, so to speak, on the first reflection
suggested by her naturally good heart.

The marquis was so handsome, he had met her abuse with a dignity so sad
and calm, he appeared to suffer so much with the cold--he who had
undoubtedly been reared in the lap of luxury--that the good woman,
feeling also the irresistible attraction which this singular personage
always exercised, passed almost instantaneously from insult to respect,
from harshness to commiseration; she hastily readjusted her head-dress,
muttered some unintelligible words, and disappeared, to the great
astonishment of the Marquis.

The ex-professor, who had no doubt been waiting the result of this
conversation to come out of his den, partly pushed open the door of the
little room, and said:

"So this miserable harpy has gone? Pardon me--but I basely fled before
the enemy" . . .

"You were there, my good Dominique? . . . Well, you have heard . . .
Good Heavens!--what humiliation! To seem to this woman a man of bad
faith! Ah, this is horrible . . . Dominique, I am resolved . . . if my
uncle does not come, I will enlist . . . I will pay this cursed debt
with the price of my enlistment . . . at least I shall no longer have to
blush . . ."

"You enlist, and renounce all your hopes!"

"They are all folly! I went again to-day to the palace . . . there is no
longer any hope. It would be necessary, in order to carry on the lawsuit
against the German princes, or the Superintendent of Xaintonge, to
deposit with the solicitor more money than I shall ever have. I renounce
it;--but hold, Dominique! I do not feel well, I am cold"--and the
Marquis sank trembling on the side of his bed.

"Poor child! I can well believe it"--said the professor, with a mournful
sigh--"to be out in this cold rain,--to come in without finding a spark
of fire . . . to be received by the insults of that hag, whom I wish I
could put into the fireplace in the shape of faggots, for, alas! as for
wood . . . God knows if I" . . .

"Enough, my good Dominique," said Létorière, putting his hand over his
friend's month . . . "Have you not already done too much for me? Have
you not abandoned your class, your situation?"

"And Socrates? did not that sage, that great philosopher, abandon
everything . . . to follow Alcibiades!!! Only as it is not so cold in
Athens as in Paris . . . Socrates had not the pain of seeing his pupil
shivering with cold. But, listen to me! You had better lie down . . .
take off your wet clothes,--you will be warmer in bed."

"You are right, Dominique; I do not know,--but I think I am
feverish". . .

"No! not so bad as that! to see you fall sick!" Then, turning with an
angry air, Dominique cried, shaking his first at the door by which
Madelaine had gone out:

"'Tis you, you cursed hag, who have brought this new misfortune upon my
unhappy pupil, with your indiscreet clamorings! I'm sorry now that I did
not put you out neck and heels . . ."

In the midst of this apostrophe the door opened, and Dominique saw, with
astonishment, a porter bringing in two enormous faggots, and some
packages of kindlings. . . .

"You are mistaken; this wood is not for us, my lad," said Dominique,
with a sigh.

"Isn't it here that the Marquis of Létorière lives, sir?"

"Yes."

"Well, the wood is to come here. . . . The great woman in a brown cloak
said that she was coming with a brazier, and something to make a nice
little lunch for the Marquis."

"The great woman in a brown cloak?" demanded Dominique.

"Yes, sir, and she has paid for the wood."

"The wood is paid for. Do you hear that, my worthy pupil? Now you shall
have some fire," . . . cried Dominique, joyfully turning towards
Létorière, who, seized with a sudden attack of fever, had gone to bed.

Happily Dame Landry soon came, and confusedly explained the enigma. That
worthy woman had in one hand a kettle of boiling water, and in the other
some lighted charcoal on a shovel.

When the porter had gone, Dame Landry, seeing the paleness of the
Marquis, cried out:

"Poor young gentleman! he has a fever, that's certain . . . the cold has
taken hold of him, and I . . . who was not ashamed to stop and gossip
while he was shivering. . . . But come, come . . . don't stand there
looking at me like a wax figure, my dear sir. Lay the wood properly in
the fireplace; light it, while I prepare something he can eat. Have you
a clean cup?" Then approaching the bed, and feeling of the thin cover,
. . . "Gracious goodness! . . . he is not warm enough! . . . go and get
two or three warm blankets . . . and his head . . . that is too
low . . . he needs a pillow . . . go and get one. And some curtains! How
is it that this alcove has no curtains? Nor the windows either? You see
that daylight is not good for the eyes of the young Marquis. . . . Go and
get them,--I can't do everything myself!"

The honest professor, to whom these conflicting and hurried orders were
given, stood astonished before Madelaine, endeavoring to understand the
cause of this wonderful change. Suddenly he cried, speaking to himself:

"It is his _charm!_ There is no doubt of it! it is the natural charm
with which he is endowed that has begun to work; . . . it has seduced
the tailor's wife as Alcibiades seduced Timea, the wife of Agis, King of
Lacedemonia . . . and all that . . . without offending virtue, which is
yet more beautiful and meritorious! My dear woman, I must acknowledge to
you that we have neither pillow, nor curtains, nor blankets." . . .

"What a pity!" said Madelaine, in a low voice, and much moved. Then
seeing the professor still draped in his toga, she cried: "Well, then,
until the bed can be better furnished, give me this coverlet, instead of
keeping it round you like a regular carnival dress; at your age, are you
not ashamed of such a thing?" and the housewife pulled resolutely at one
of the corners of the Dominique's toga. But he, stoutly clutching his
garment, exclaimed:

"My good woman! listen to me . . . let me alone . . . don't pull so hard
. . . it is a question of decency . . . I suppose I must confide in you
. . . you are of a respectable age, and moreover the wife of a tailor;"
. . . and Dominique added in a low voice: "My breeches, as our fathers
called them, being absolutely unfit for service . . . and having no
dressing-gown, I am obliged to substitute this kind of Roman mantle for
a more suitable garment."

"Is it possible?" said Madelaine, letting go the corners of the
coverlet. . . . "If this is true, I will send Landry to you this
evening." Then she added, in a low voice, stirring the fire into a
bright blaze, which threw its cheerful light through the miserable
chamber . . . "Is the Marquis asleep? if not, will he drink this?" and
she handed him a cup of warm drink.

Dominique approached the bed on tip-toe.

"How do you feel?" said he.

"I am cold . . . my head aches," replied the Marquis, in a feeble voice.
"But what is this? How happens it that we have a fire?"

"We have a fire because you are _charming_ . . . this good and worthy
woman has made it; and here is a nice warm drink, very warm, that you
must take; she has also prepared that for you. Come, take courage! Your
good star is rising in the very respectable countenance of Dame
Landry" . . .

The Marquis, suffering with a horrible headache, hardly comprehended a
word of what Dominique said, or of what rising star he spoke;
nevertheless, he took the cup, drank, and fell into a profound slumber.
Then the worthy woman approached the bed, holding her breath; she
smoothed the clothes with truly maternal care, and returned to
Dominique.

"You must be generous, and pardon me, sir," said she; "just now I was
very rude to the Marquis; but, you see, it was my husband who turned my
head; I must say also that I had never seen the young gentleman,--so
young! so pretty, and an orphan, too . . . and then for a gentleman like
him not to have a fire in midwinter, when work-people like us always
have a good warm stove! Come now, my worthy sir, I shall always reproach
myself for having dared to speak impudently to the Marquis; but be
assured, at least, that as long as Madelaine Landry lives, she will
always be his humble servant. . . . Now, sir"--and the good woman cast
down her eyes while drawing a little bag from her pocket--"on my way
here I changed a bill of three hundred francs; here is the young Marquis
confined to his bed, and perhaps he will need something,--a doctor. I
should never have dared to offer it to him, but with you I am more bold
. . . Come, now, sir, take it, and we will put it on the bill, and
forget the vile words I said to you." . . .

"As to that, we are perfectly equal, my dear woman, for if you called me
an owl, I called you an osprey; so we won't speak of it any more. . . .
As to this loan, I ought perhaps to tell you that the return of the
Abbé de Vighan, my pupil's uncle, may be postponed, and that it may
perhaps be a long time before we can restore what you so generously
offer--and after the scene of this morning, I fear perhaps . . ."

"Don't speak of that, sir, or I shall die of shame, upon my word. The
Marquis can return it whenever he will; God be thanked! we are not
dependant on sixty dollars for our living."

"I will take this debt on myself, my worthy woman; besides, my next
half-year's income from the salt tax will pay you the amount."

"Ah! well and good! It seems to me that I am more than half pardoned for
my insolence. And now, sir, I will go home and get what the Marquis
needs; and I will come back every day, if you will allow me, and
establish myself as his nurse; for men know nothing about taking care of
the sick,--without offence to you, sir."

And Madelaine left Dominique near his pupil's bed, in possession of a
good fire, an enjoyment the old man had not known for a long time.




CHAPTER IV

MYSTERIES


The illness of M. de Létorière drew towards its close; he was nearly
convalescent, thanks to the assiduous care of Madelaine, her husband,
and Martin Kraft, the apprentice. Each had vied with the good Dominique
in devotion to him. The Marquis had shown himself so affectionately
grateful for all these touching proofs of interest, had appeared so to
justify and merit them by his delicacy and the goodness of his heart,
that the tailor and his wife became more and more attached to their
"dear young gentleman," as they called him.

Spring approached; one day Dominique, who had gone out to endeavor to
persuade an attorney to follow up one of the lawsuits of Létorière,
came back with a face at once radiant and astonished; the apprentice
Kraft followed him, bringing carefully an immense basket filled with the
rarest fruits and flowers. On a little paper attached by a pin to a
magnificent pine-apple, were written these words: "_To Monsieur the
Marquis of Létorière._"

After having admired this charming gift, with almost childish curiosity,
and vainly seeking to learn from whom it came, for an unknown man had
left the basket with the porter, the Marquis replaced the address with
the following:--"_To my good friends Landry and his wife_," and told
Kraft to carry as his gift the fruit and flowers to Master Landry.

"Tell them I do not know whence this gift comes, but it is the first and
only thing I have to offer them, and I send it to them as a proof of my
eternal gratitude."

Some days after, he had another surprise. In a beautiful little
writing-desk left at the porter's by one of the boys of Bordier, the
celebrated worker in ebony, the Marquis found this note:


"Your heart tells you truly that some one is interested in you. That is
well. Send these two letters as addressed."


In one compartment of the desk Létorière found two sealed letters. One
was addressed:

_To Monsieur Landry, tailor, at The Golden Scissors._

The other: _To Mons. Buston, attorney to the Castle._

This gentleman, the lawyer engaged in the Marquis's lawsuit, had hardly
been willing to take any steps for fear of not being paid for his
services.

Létorière and Dominique looked at each other in amazement.

"What did I tell you?" cried the ex-professor; "will you believe me now?
will you defy your destiny? I have always told you that you would have
nothing to envy in the son of Clinias!"

Surprised at this incident, whose consequences he could not foresee, the
Marquis begged Dominique to deliver the attorney's letter, and sent
Master Landry's by the porter. An hour after, the tailor, Madelaine, and
the apprentice were at the feet of the young gentleman.

"Thanks to you, Monsieur the Marquis, I have the patronage of
Monseigneur the Duke of Bourbon!" cried Landry. "It is a clear and net
profit of six thousand livres a year! Behold me, in future, a rich man!"

"Thanks to you, Monsieur the Marquis, our neighbor Mathurin, who got
from us all our custom, will burst with envy," said Madelaine.

"Thanks to you, Monsieur the Marquis, Dame Madelaine, angry at seeing
our customers leave us, will give me no more cuff's!" said Martin Kraft.

"My friends," replied Létorière, "I am extremely pleased at what has
happened to you; but I declare to you, that unfortunately I have had
nothing to do with it."

"Ah, Monsieur the Marquis, why will you say that?" said Madelaine,
reproachfully; and drawing from her pocket the precious missive, she
read: 'Master Landry is informed that at the express recommendation of
the Marquis of Létorière, Monseigneur the Duke of Bourbon deigns to
appoint him his personal tailor, as well as that of his household'; you
see that, Monsieur the Marquis?" said Madelaine; and, gazing at
Létorière with eyes filled with tears of joy, she added: "This custom
makes our fortunes forever . . . Ah, well! on the faith of an honest
woman, the basket of flowers and the note that the Marquis sent us
yesterday, gave us perhaps more pleasure!"

"And you are right, my friends," said Létorière; "for yesterday it was
truly I who sent you the present, not knowing whence it came. But to-day
I did not know what the letter contained; it is a mystery that I cannot
solve."

At this moment Dominique entered his countenance completely changed; he
had come up the five flights of stairs with so much haste that he could
hardly speak; the only words he could utter in a broken voice were:
"rich . . . rich . . . the attorney . . . the lawsuit . . . I was
right!" . . . And he threw himself on the neck of his pupil with
theatrical fervor.

"Be calm, my good Dominique," said the Marquis. "Tell me something of
this happy news which so transports you . . ."

"Oh, yes, by heaven! this is good news!" said the ex-professor, still
breathless. "Imagine me going to this Buston's . . . this bird of
prey . . . your solicitor. . . . When the clerks see me enter his office,
they begin the umbecoming pleasantries with which they have always greeted
me . . . I despise them, after the manner of Socrates, and ask to see Mr.
Buston. . . . As usual, these impudent young blackguards answer me in
chorus in all tones of voice . . . 'he is not here! he is not here!' In
the midst of this infernal racket, I approach the first clerk and show
him my letter. . . . Ah! if you could have seen his countenance!" cried
Dominique, bursting with laughter and slapping his thighs.

"Well! well! finish, then," said the Marquis.

"Well! the first clerk had already opened his mouth to utter some piece
of insolence; but as soon as he recognized the writing on the letter, he
became serious as a thrashed donkey, imposed silence on his comrades,
and rose, saying to me respectfully: 'I will have the honor of
conducting Mr. Dominique to my master.' I entered the presence of the
solicitor, until then invisible or insolent. Quite another reception!
The vulture had become a young turtle-dove, and cooed at me these words,
after he had read the letter: 'I have never for an instant doubted the
successful issue of the Marquis's lawsuit against the Intendant of
Xaintonge, touching the forests of Brion. . . . This letter removes the
only difficulties which prevented the prosecution of the case, which I
will immediately attend to, while waiting for the documents of the great
lawsuit against the German princes. I have also so much faith in the
validity of the cause of Monsieur the Marquis, that I am willing, sir,
to open an account with him to the amount of twenty thousand livres
. . . this sum not being the fifth part of that which he will obtain for
his claims on the Intendancy of Xaintonge."

"But it is a dream! a dream!" said the Marquis, putting his hand to his
forehead.

"Truly, it seems to me such," replied Dominique, "and in order to assure
myself of its reality, I accepted the offer of Mr. Buston, having your
power of attorney."

"Well," said Létorière, "go on" . . .

"Yes, well," said Dominique, handing a portfolio to the Marquis,--"on my
simple receipt, he has advanced twenty thousand livres, which behold, in
bonds at sight, on the public funds." . . .

It would be impossible to paint the astonishment and joy of the actors
in this scene.

After thanks and benedictions without number, the tailor, his wife, and
apprentice, retired.

The Marquis remaining alone with Dominique, exhausted himself with vain
conjectures as to the source of this mysterious favor. Bordier, the
worker in ebony, could give no information as to the purchaser of the
desk. The solicitor, maintained the most obstinate silence as to the
contents and author of the letter which had made so great a change in
his view of the Marquis's lawsuit. Later, the private secretary of the
Duke of Bourbon answered, that his Highness had himself ordered the
appointment of Master Landry to be tailor of his household.

When the health of the Marquis was fully reestablished, he went to
occupy, with Dominique, a small apartment in the Faubourg St. Germain.
The brave Jerome Sicard, the coachman who was willing to carry
Létorière _gratis_, because he resembled _a good angel_, was installed
there, to his great joy, as valet-de-chambre. This was the only
recompense which he solicited, when the Marquis asked him in what manner
he should acknowledge his services. It is unnecessary to say that
Sicard, Master Landry, and his wife, were also generously and delicately
recompensed for their kindness.

Very strangely, none of the noble actions of the Marquis remained
unknown to his mysterious protector. A little note arrived by post,
containing these words . . .--"It is well . . . continue . . . you are
always watched." . . .

At other times he received suggestions full of wisdom: he was
recommended to enjoy the pleasures of the world and of his age, but
always to preserve the integrity and loyalty of his character; for _on
that his future depended._

At still other times, Létorière was advised to accomplish himself in
all the exercises of a gentleman. He heeded this counsel, and soon
excelled in fencing, riding, and all the games which require agility and
dexterity.

Sometimes these letters, which revealed a growing and enduring
affection, reached the Marquis by charming and unexpected means; at one
time in a beautiful Sèvres vase, filled with flowers, which an unknown
person left with the porter; at another, a perfume-bag, wonderfully
embroidered with his arms and cypher, would be found in his pocket on
his return from a game of tennis.

This singular correspondence had lasted nearly a year, when Létorière
gained his lawsuit against the Intendancy of Xaintonge.

The day after judgment was given, a groom, in the livery of the Marquis,
brought him two magnificent English horses, which were just then coming
into fashion. Their harness and equipments were marvels of richness and
elegance. A letter, in these words, accompanied the gift:


"Your lawsuit is gained; you can now live as is becoming a gentleman of
your rank. You will go to Chévin, the genealogist; he will arrange your
titles to nobility; you will deposit them in the archives, in order to
be presented to the king, and to have the _entrée_ to the court. You
will undoubtedly have the honor of hunting with his majesty. These
horses will serve you. Your conduct is satisfactory."


To all Létorière's questions, the groom's only answer was that an
unknown person had bought the horses of Gabart, a famous dealer of that
day, adding that he would, in a short time, bring the equipments. As to
the unknown man, he was clothed in black, rather stout, and about fifty
years old.


Some time after this new surprise, the Marquis received the
following note:


"Go this evening to the opera ball; wait near the King's Corner between
twelve and one o'clock; wear a black domino, and attach to it a blue and
white ribbon."


Létorière had never been to an opera ball in his life. Though not
leading the life of a recluse, he had hitherto employed his time in his
academical studies, in walking with Dominique, in long readings of Greek
and Latin poets, and frequent attendance at the Comédie Française.

Although Dominique had no deep insight into the human heart, he was
sometimes uneasy at seeing his pupil so calm at an age when the passions
often assert themselves so energetically. At one time the worthy man had
thought that the mysterious protector of his pupil was a woman; but he
had never mentioned his suspicions to Létorière.

When the latter informed Dominique that he was going to the opera ball,
the ex-professor conceived the happy idea of accompanying his pupil.
Létorière was pleased with the plan, and they set off together.

Once launched into the vortex, the two friends, embarrassed like
provincials, had great trouble in finding the King's Corner, and were at
first victims of the raillery of the spectators; the Marquis's figure
was so slender, his manner so elegant, his foot so pretty, and his hands
so charming, that he was easily taken for a woman; while Dominique,
tall, bony, awkward and clumsy, passed for the husband.

Létorière reddened with anger under his mask, and needed all the
authority and persuasion of Dominique to prevent him from bursting out.

Presently two dominoes approached them.

The tallest figure took Dominique's arm, while the smaller, approaching
Létorière, whispered these words in his ear: _Continue . . . we
are . . . persevere . . . and hope._ . . .

The Marquis felt a little box slipped into his hand, and before he could
say one word, or make a motion, the domino was lost in the crowd.

Létorière was enchanted. The voice which had whispered in his ear the
same words that his unknown protector had so often written, was the
voice of a woman, and of infinite sweetness; he thought he saw, shining
through the silken mask, two great blue eyes.

Intoxicated with joy, feeling a thousand new emotions rising in his
breast, he utterly forgot Dominique, and had the insane idea of finding
again his domino, believing he should recognize among a thousand the
great blue eyes which were fixed upon his with such a singularly tender
expression. Towards five o'clock in the morning he realized the futility
of his search, and returned home, impatient to know what the box
contained.

He found within, one of those large seal rings then so fashionable: it
was surrounded by diamonds, and on the enamelled centre was painted with
admirable delicacy in the midst of a cloud, a charming blue eye, whose
expression was such, that Létorière recognized at once the sweet and
tender look of his domino. On the setting were these words, in
microscopic characters: _It follows you everywhere._

The letter contained these words: "You are twenty years old, young,
handsome, noble, brilliant, and charming; you have enough money to be
extravagant. Your future is in your own hands . . . we shall see if the
counsels we have given you for a year will continue to bear fruit . . .
we shall write to you no more . . . you have free liberty . . . _but you
be followed everywhere._ In four years from this time, whether or not
your conduct equals our expectations, you will receive a letter . . .
Henceforth, then, hope and persevere . . ."

During a month the Marquis was almost devoured by curiosity. He walked
the streets like a crazy person, looking anxiously at all the blue eyes
he met, and comparing them with his ring; many beautiful blue eyes
timidly fell before his ardent and restless gaze; others responded
languidly, others angrily, but he discovered nothing.

He remembered that he had been requested to deposit his titles in the
archives, in order that he might be received at court; he fulfilled the
necessary formalities, and waited the return of one of his distant
relatives, the Count of Appreville, to have the honor of being presented
to King Louis XV.




CHAPTER V

THE CAVALIER


One day, the Marquis was sauntering by the banks of the grand canal, at
Versailles, in melancholy meditation, and thinking, sadly, that he had
been abandoned by his mysterious protectress. He had come from the
riding-school, and his riding costume set off wonderfully the elegance
of his figure. It consisted of a green coat trimmed with rich gold lace,
scarlet breeches, a vest of the same color, and high boots of shining
black morocco, the tops of which hung loosely upon knee-pieces of fine
cambric. At a little distance from him, Létorière saw a middle-aged
horseman, who was vainly striving to make his beast pass a marble
pedestal.

Two persons witnessed this contest; one, a man of fifty to sixty years,
dressed in a coat of pearl-gray taffeta and silk small-clothes of the
same color, had a countenance at once handsome, noble, and benevolent.
He leaned on the arm of an older man, quite small, slightly stooping,
superbly dressed in the old fashion of the Regency, and whose pale face
was furrowed with deep wrinkles.

The more simply dressed of the two said to the other, pointing to
Létorière:

"What a charming face! what a pretty figure! I never saw anything more
enchanting. . . . Did you, marshal?"

"Hum . . . hum . . ." said the latter, with a dry cough; "that litt'
gent'l'm'n? he's well 'nough . . . but he's as awkward as a sprinkler of
holy water,"--answered the Duke de Richelieu, who had preserved the old
vulgar manner of clipping his words, so much in vogue among the _roués_
of the Regency. . .

"He? with his pretty face? he would make a nice sprinkler of holy water
to saints of your stamp!" said the other, smiling maliciously.

The horse was still obstinate; the rider, weary of gentle measures, used
in turn the whip and spur, but with no results save kicks and fearful
plunges.

Gradually, M. de Richelieu and his companion approached the Marquis.
Seeing two gentlemen of venerable appearance coming towards him,
Létorière respectfully saluted them.

"Well! young man . . . which has the right in this discussion, the man
or the horse?" said the friend of M. de Richelieu.

"Faith! I hardly know, sir! the rider reasons with blows of his whip,
and the beast replies by kicks. Such a conversation can be carried on
for some time."

This answer, spoken without too much assurance, but with all the
confident gayety of youth, made the questioner smile.

"You speak of it very nonchalantly, my young master . . . I should like
very well to see you in the place of that horseman . . . you probably do
not know that this is a mare of Ukraine. She came from Germany, and is a
veritable demon . . . one that La Guérinière himself has not been able
to master."

"If I were in that horseman's place, sir, I might perhaps be not more
able, but more lucky," resolutely replied the Marquis.

"Truly! Well, will you try? Will you mount Barbara?"

"The mare is so beautiful . . . so proud . . . notwithstanding her
viciousness . . . that I accept with all my heart, sir; and besides, the
grass is so green that one need not desire a better carpet to fall
upon," answered Létorière joyously.

"I have a horrible fear that he will break his neck," said the companion
of M. de Richelieu in a whisper.

"With such a pretty face, so frolicsome and so captivating, one need
fear neither horses, nor men, nor women, and if he should fall . . . one
never falls alone . . . I have faith in him . . . he has a very enticing
air." . . .

"Hullo! St. Clair," said the other, addressing the groom, "don't
stubbornly persevere any longer; get down from the horse. . . . This
young gentleman desires a lesson, and you can give it to him," he added,
laughing.

St. Clair obeyed the order, and got off the horse.

Létorière, a little displeased at the last words of the unknown,
replied to him with respectful firmness:

"I will always receive with pleasure or with resignation any lesson
which I ask for, or which I deserve, sir; but here I do not find myself
in either one of these cases."

The unknown and M. de Richelieu looked at each other, suppressing a
great desire to laugh.

"You must take care," said the Marshal softly, "he looks like a famous
fighter!"

"You'll see that he will challenge me--and before you, the senior of the
Marshals of France, the President of the tribunal of honor"--said the
other;--and he added, regarding the Marquis with a very serious air:

"You take it with a high hand, my young master!"

"God bless me! I take it as I must, sir," cried Létorière, resolutely
setting his hand on his hip.

At this bravado, M. de Richelieu and the unknown burst out laughing, and
the Marquis began to feel very much irritated, when St. Clair, who had
not dismounted from the horse without difficulty, approached, hat in
hand, and said to the gentleman clothed in gray:

"Sire, nothing can be done with that mare."

"The King!" cried the Marquis in confusion, and he knelt and bowed his
head with a repentant air.

"By St. Louis, my young friend," said Louis XV., smiling, "I have seen
the time when you would remind us that all gentlemen are our peers, and
that in the old times a chevalier could cross lances with a king."

"Ah, Sire! pardon . . . pardon." . . .

"Come! rise, rise, my gentle knight," . . . and by a movement full of
that majestic grace that this most amiable and most graceful of kings
exhibited, in even the most trifling acts, he touched slightly, with the
tip of his finger, Létorière's cheek, who, still on his knee, kissed
this beautiful royal hand with profound veneration.

Létorière arose, his forehead suffused with a charming blush, his
beautiful black eyes moist with tears, so profoundly was he touched with
the ineffable kindness of his sovereign.

This emotion, so pure, so youthful and so naïve, struck Louis XV.
delightfully. The most adroit flattery could not have effected this
favorable impression.

"What is your name, my child?" he asked, regarding the Marquis with
interest.

"Charles-Louis de Vighan, Marquis of Létorière, Sire."

"You are from Xaintonge," said the king, who knew wonderfully well the
genealogy of his nobility.

"But you have deposited your titles," added he. "You ought to be
presented to me. Why have you not been?"

"Sire, I await the return of M. the Count of Appreville, my relative, to
have that honor." . . .

"Marshal Richelieu, will you act as sponsor?" said the king, addressing
the duke, who replied by a respectful gesture.

"That's right!" said the king. . . . "I do not forget, my child, that
you have almost censured St. Clair . . . you must make him some amends.
. . . Are you bold enough to encounter Barbara?" And the king pointed to
the mare, who, held by the bridle, still kicked and pranced,
notwithstanding the threats and caresses of the groom. "Are you not
afraid of this fiery beast?"

"I fear but one thing, Sire: it is to show myself unworthy of the
eminent grace with which the king deigns to honor me in ordering me to
mount a horse in his presence."

"Is he not charming? He answers with such perfect grace . . . with such
exquisite tact," . . . said the king to M. de Richelieu, while
Létorière, his heart palpitating with emotion, approached the
redoubtable Barbara.

"The king has told me sometimes that I'm a connoisseur of faces. Yes,
yes, I can predict to the king that before six months this young falcon
will have taken flight,--and then, beware of him;--there'll be a great
flutter among the doves, I'll answer for it."

"Your example will have been of great service to him," said the king,
smiling; then suddenly crying out with fright: "Ah, the unhappy child!
he will kill himself. . . . St. Clair has given up the reins, and the
cursed mare will not let him approach her. . . . What kicks . . . what
plunges. . . . She is a devil to mount . . . St. Clair, why did you not
hold her while he mounted?"

"Sire," said the old groom in a peevish tone, "the gentleman told me
that he would manage the affair himself . . ."

"And by Heaven, he does manage it" . . . said the king with
astonishment;--"see there, marshal! on my word . . . he has bewitched
her! . . . See how he approaches her, and she does not budge. . . . He
caresses her, and the beast does not answer him with a bite, or a kick.
. . . What do you say to that, St. Clair?"

"Sire, I say . . . I say . . . I say that I don't understand it at all.
. . . Ordinarily she can only be mounted by the aid of the nose-twister,
she is so skittish and wild." . . .

"Now see him in the saddle . . . faith! . . . he is wonderful . . . full
of grace and agility. . . . What do you say to it Richelieu? What do you
say, St. Clair?" said the king, whose whole face was radiant with
pleasure at seeing the prowess of his young _protégé._

"Faith! I should say to the king that the boy, young as he is, is an
accomplished horseman,--but he must possess some charm to have quieted
the villainous kicker," . . . replied the marshal.

"One cannot say, Sire, that the posture of the gentleman is absolutely
bad," said old St. Clair. "He sits firm; his body and limbs are well
poised, and he seems to have a hand at once light and steady". . .

"And what the devil do you want more?" said the king; "but let us
see . . . will she pass before the marble statue which so frightened her
before? . . . No . . . no . . . she refuses--what bounds! Ah! poor boy!"
. . .

"He seems screwed to her back. She'll have to give in," cried the
marshal; "and with his little figure. He must be strong as Hercules."

"Monseigneur well knows that there is no great skill in keeping one's
seat while a horse rears . . . the science is in foreseeing and
preventing the rearing," rejoined St. Clair.

"Even in that case you ought to be satisfied. Look! look, see how she
passes the statue . . . as easy, as comfortably as an old hack. Well
done! is he a sorcerer?" cried Louis XV., looking with astonishment at
the marshal and St. Clair, not less surprised than himself.

Létorière, having made the mare pass and repass several times before,
the statue which had at first so much frightened her, approached the
king: the Marquis held his hat in his right hand, and with the left he
patted Barbara, who tossed her head and champed her bit with a most
coquettish air; one would have said she was proud of the light weight
she carried. The face of the young gentleman, still animated by the
exercise, and the proud joy of having succeeded so well in presence of
the king, was resplendent with brightness and beauty.

Seeing his _protégé_ so handsome, so radiant and so young, Louis XV.
regarded him with the tender and melancholy interest which men advanced
in age, or satiated with pleasure, often feel in contemplating the
confident joy, the simple ardor of youth.

This excellent prince felt himself happy in the power, by a generous
caprice, open to this youth a future as brilliant as a fairy tale. "It
is sometimes good to be a king," said he to M. de Richelieu, with
involuntary emotion.

The old marshal, before answering, appeared to interrogate the
expression of the prince, in order to penetrate the sense of this
exclamation, which he did not comprehend. All was dead in this heart
worn out by a narrow but unbridled ambition, and hardened by a cruel
egotism. Incapable of seizing the meaning of the king, the marshal
replied by a courtly insipidity:

"If it is sometimes good to be a king, Sire, it is always good to be the
subject of your majesty."

Louis XV. smiled with a polite, frigid air, and replied: "It is pleasant
to find one's self so well understood." Then addressing Létorière, who
awaited his orders: "Well, my child, tell me, how have you conquered so
quickly and easily this unconquerable creature?"

"Your majesty told me that this animal came from Germany; knowing that
the Germans talk much to their horses, and that they drive them almost
as much by the voice as by the hand or the spur, I spoke German to her.
Recognizing, undoubtedly, a language to which she was accustomed, she
almost immediately became calm."

"He is right. Nothing is more simple . . . don't you see, St.
Clair?" . . . said the king.

"Yes, Sire," timidly replied Létorière, throwing a glance on the old
St. Clair, who appeared profoundly humiliated; "yes, Sire, nothing is
more simple when one speaks German" . . .

This almost bold answer was dictated by a sentiment so delicate and
generous, that Louis XV., greatly moved, cried: "Well, very well, my
child . . . you are right . . . if my old St. Clair had known how to
speak German, he would have done as you did; . . . but as he is too old
to learn that now, and as Barbara does not appear to have any taste for
the French language, keep this mare . . . Marquis of Létorière, the
King gives her to you."

The Marquis bowed respectfully . . .

"Richelieu, you will present him to me to-morrow, at my first reception,
without ceremony," said the king to the marshal. Then making an
affectionate gesture to Létorière, Louis XV. entered the palace.

The next day Létorière was officially presented; a few days after,
Louis XV. appointed him master of the horse, and later, he gave him a
cornetcy in the Mousquetaires.

From this moment the fortunes of Létorière did nothing but grow, for
the king's affection for him increased every day.

It would take too long to tell how the favorite became the most
conspicuous man at court: but this progress was simple and natural. To
all his rare advantages of mind, of person, of birth, and of heart,
there was soon added an exquisite taste in everything. His horses, his
furniture, and his dress became the type of elegance and good taste. In
short, at the end of four years the poor scholar of Plessis College had
become one of the most brilliant courtiers, and inspired at once
admiration, envy, hatred, adoration, as do all people endowed with
superior parts.

This narrative will not allow the recital of many brilliant exploits of
which the Marquis was the hero, or of which he was supposed to be the
hero, for his discretion was rare.

But it was well known that he could never be reproached with baseness or
perfidy in love. In two duels he showed himself brave and generous: the
only fault with which he could be charged, was great extravagance; but
this he could well afford, owing to the gaining of his lawsuit against
the Intendancy of Poitou, and also to the munificence and bounties of
the king, who successively appointed him Commendatory Abbé of the
Trinité de Vendôme, commander of the united orders of St. Lazare and
Notre-Dame-du-Mont-Carmel, a colonel of cavalry, counsellor of State, of
the sword, and grand seneschal of Aunis.

Such was the prodigious prosperity which Létorière reached during the
four years after his fortunate encounter with the king.

Amid all his successes, Létorière had never forgotten the great blue
eyes of the Opera Ball, and almost every day he contemplated his ring
with sadness.

Notwithstanding this device, _it follows you everywhere_, written under
an eye of such a charming blue, which appeared to regard him with a
tenderness full of confidence and serenity, the Marquis feared that he
had been completely forgotten by his mysterious protectress. In four
years he had received no news from her. Sometimes he trembled lest his
reputation as a man of gallantry, by awaking in the breast of the
unknown a just jealousy, might forever alienate her from him; sometimes
he feared that absence, or sickness, or death even, might have deprived
him of this strange friendship.

Moved by a singular and inexplicable sentiment, Létorière had always,
in his gallantries, carefully shunned the seductions of blue eyes,
however cruel this self-denial had often appeared to him. He had dreaded
to profane, perhaps unwittingly, a love which he thought was so little
like other loves. The more he prospered in a life which destiny had made
so beautiful, and perhaps too easily happy for him, the more
idolatrously did he dwell, almost with regret, on that season of
calmness and tranquil happiness, when the only emotion of his life was
excited by one of the letters in which his unknown had given him counsel
so full of wisdom.

He noted, almost with affright, the approach of the fatal limit that had
been assigned to him, when he was to receive a last letter which would
decide his destiny. This letter he received that very day, four years
after the meeting at the Opera Ball. It was as follows:


"For five years I have loved you . . . for five years I have followed
you through all the phases of your life, obscure or brilliant, poor or
fortunate. You are worthy of the heart which I offer you with
confidence. I am an orphan, my hand is free. I offer it to you. . . . No
human power can change my resolution to be yours. If you refuse to
realize my most cherished projects, withdrawn into a cloister, each day
I shall pray Heaven to grant you that happiness I would so willingly
have made for you.

"JULIE DE SOISSONS,

"_Princess of S . . . C . . ._"




CHAPTER VI

MADEMOISELLE DE SOISSONS


Mademoiselle Victoire-Julie de Soissons, Princess of S . . . C . . . ,
lived with her aunt, the Princess of Rohan-Soubise. Aged about
twenty-five years, the princess Julie was rather pretty than beautiful;
she was of medium size, and perfectly graceful. Although the use of
powder was then in the height of fashion, very rarely did Mlle. de
Soissons consent to cover lightly with it her magnificent flaxen hair,
which, in a manner peculiar to herself, she rolled off her face with
most becoming effect. Her eyes were blue, her lips vermilion, her teeth
pearls, her face a pure and delicate oval, her complexion, too brown for
a blonde, was nevertheless so pure and brilliant, that one could not
desire it to be whiter. The habitual expression of her countenance was
melancholy, yet sweet.

Of a nature at once impressible and reserved, the least emotion brought
a lovely blush to her cheeks and charming neck.

If she heard a touching or pitiful tale, her eyes would fill with tears.
Although a princess of royal blood, no one felt less than she the pride
of birth; the requirements of her lofty station weighed upon her. By
natural disposition and taste, she preferred a simple and obscure life,
to the ostentatious career to which she had been appointed. Very
retiring, very proud, with the noble pride of a soul conscious of its
own superiority, the princess Julie was esteemed disdainful, when she
was, in fact, only delicate and timid.

Vulgar natures, pretentious or egotistic, especially repelled her. The
most striking feature of her character was an indomitable will. Her
frail bodily envelope concealed a most valiant and resolute heart. No
human consideration could influence her decisions when she believed them
based on justice and reason. By a singular contrast, notwithstanding her
princely birth, the nobility of her heart, her firmness, her mind as
lovely as it was cultivated, the princess Julie almost always displayed
the most incredible timidity, even among persons who were in nowise her
equals.

An orphan, and having lived for seven years with Madame de
Rohan-Soubise, Mlle. de Soissons felt no sympathy with her relative. All
the secrets of her heart were reserved for Martha, her nurse, a simple,
good-hearted creature who had brought her up, and who loved her with the
blind tenderness of a mother.

For five years Mlle. de Soissons had persistently refused the most
brilliant offers of marriage from persons of suitable birth and fortune;
for five years she had loved the Marquis of Létorière.

Her singularly good heart, her rather romantic temperament, her
independent spirit, had not remained insensible to the history of
misfortunes so courageously borne by that young gentleman.

When Jerome Sicard went to execute Létorière's commission, after
having carried him gratuitously to Palais Marchand, it will be
remembered that a man getting out of the carriage had seen Dame Landry
in the height of her wrath against the Marquis. Curious to learn the
termination of the affair, this man, the steward of Madame
Rohan-Soubise, returning several days after to The Golden Scissors,
found Dame Landry full of enthusiasm for her debtor. The steward
described this singular drama to Dame Martha, Mlle. de Soisson's nurse,
relating all the details. Dame Martha, in turn, communicated them to the
princess Julie. Such was the first cause of the lively interest which
the latter soon felt for M. de Létorière.

During the illness of the young Marquis, Julie often sent her faithful
nurse, well disguised in her long black cloak, to get tidings of
Dominique's pupil.

When Létorière was convalescent, Dame Martha was deputed to convey
secretly the basket of flowers and fruit, of which mention has been
made, without allowing any one to guess whence the gift came, and
afterwards to find out the day on which he would be able to go out; the
princess desired very much to see this enchanter who charmed the most
pedantic regent of the college, the most rebellious wife of a tailor,
and the coarsest of coachmen.

As a woman of her rank could go out neither alone nor on foot, Martha
endeavored to ascertain if there were not, in the Rue St. Florentin,
some shop where she could lie concealed, to watch this young invalid,
under the pretence of making purchases.

She found an obscure milliner, almost opposite Létorière's house; and
knowing the hour in which the Marquis regularly went out, Julie, at the
risk of passing for an eccentric, took a carriage with one of the female
attendants of her aunt, and went to the milliner's, ostensibly for the
purpose of making purchases.

She soon saw, through the windows, the ex-professor and his pupil. The
expression of melancholy on the charming countenance of the young
gentleman, and the tender assiduities of Dominique, moved her to tears.

Her errand accomplished, the princess drove to the Tuilleries.
Létorière soon arrived there, and took a seat in the sunshine with
Dominique.

When Mlle. de Soissons could contemplate, at her ease, the ravishing
countenance of this young man, she experienced a profound and new
impression; her heart beat violently; she trembled, she blushed . . .
she loved.

To the singular character of this princess it was undoubtedly owing,
that in her eyes, one of Létorière's principal attractions was the
misfortune which pursued him. For in the generous and elevated soul of
this young girl, misfortune always found ready sympathy.

Mistress of a considerable revenue, and sure of the secrecy and fidelity
of Brissot, who had faithfully served her father, Mlle. de Soissons
employed him to keep her informed of Létorière's affairs. Fully
instructed, the steward wrote to Létorière's lawyer, who was also his
own, to follow up the lawsuit, and to make the necessary advances to the
Marquis. It was he, also, who obtained for Landry his appointment, by
means of a present made to one of the Duke of Bourbon's subalterns, who
had the charge of all such nominations.

For a long time the princess contented herself with the secret reveries
of this chaste and passionate love, watching eagerly for rare
opportunities, when she could meet the Marquis, and writing to him from
time to time. Then, when, by her secret influence, he had gained his
lawsuit, she resolved to leave him free, and see if he would prove
worthy of her. She wrote for the last time, gave him the note at the
Opera Ball, and waited.

The day on which the Marquis was presented to the king, Mlle. de
Soissons accompanied the dauphiness, and was sufficiently near to Louis
XV. to hear that prince say, to all approaching him, pointing out his
young _protégé_:

"_Admit that he is charming!_"

With much joy and pride the princess saw her choice approved, as one may
say, by these words of the king, who, as has been already said, soon
attached the Marquis to his person.

Mlle. de Soissons, until then very indifferent to court _fêtes_ and
excursions to Marly, now sought to join them on all occasions. Louis XV.
felt a warm interest in his young equerry, whom he soon promoted to his
military staff. At the chase and on the promenade, he marked with
complacency the grace and address of Létorière, and quoted his fine
and delicate repartees.

By a curious contradiction, the more the princess Julie's love increased
in her heart, the more she shunned all occasions, not only of meeting,
but of making the acquaintance of M. de Létorière.

After two years' connection with the court, the favor and success of the
Marquis were at their highest. A thousand gallantries were imputed to
him. Strange as it may seem, the jealousy of Mlle. de Soissons was not
excited. The chaste and proud passion of this young girl gave her
courage to view with pity the ephemeral and foolish loves which were
attributed to the Marquis. She felt so sure, so worthy of being
passionately adored, of being preferred to all when she revealed herself
to him, that she remained for a long time almost heedless of the
numerous flirtations of Létorière.

The princess Julie wished to watch him whom she loved, in order to judge
if he were worthy of her. . . . She readily perceived that these
successes were the natural result of the rare attractions with which he
was endowed. But she wished to know if his heart remained noble and
generous amid such intoxicating circumstances.

In a question of lofty sentiments no proofs are trifling; the daily walk
is in such cases more trustworthy, perhaps, than great bursts of
devotion; the former is the habit, the latter the accidents, of life.

Thus three poor and obscure persons had rendered important services to
Létorière during his adversity,--Dominique, the tailor, and his wife.

With keen delight, Mlle. de Soissons learned from Martha that the
Marquis continued to keep Dominique near him, and that he always treated
him with deferential affection.

Very often Létorière recounted, with manifestations of profound
gratitude, the obligations he was under to these excellent people. A man
of his age, whom the most unbounded prosperity and the most brilliant
success did not blind, who remained simple, good, and emphatically
grateful to such obscure benefactors, ought to be esteemed a man of
noble heart.

The project of Mlle. de Soissons was irrevocably resolved upon. She
would freely, boldly, offer her hand to him whom she found so worthy.

No objection of birth or fortune could change her resolution. She was an
orphan, and felt herself free to choose a husband. Profoundly
indifferent to all the reasons which her aunt daily brought to prove to
her that she, a princess of a royal house, ought to make certain
alliances, the princess Julie replied distinctly, that though she saw no
need of quoting example, Mlle. de Montpensier married M. de
Lanzun. . . . As to herself, she would marry an artizan, without scruple,
if an artizan seemed to her to deserve her love.

Madame Rohan-Soubise, utterly ignorant of her niece's secret, treated
these ideas as phantasies, foolish reveries, encouraged by the romances
of Rousseau. Mlle. de Soissons answered nothing, but secretly followed
her plan with incredible pertinacity.

Her love increased, so to speak, in proportion to the successes of him
she loved. One would have said that she waited until the Marquis was at
the height of his triumphs, in order that she might offer him her love
as their supreme consecration.

When she was assured of the nobility and solidity of his character,
without remorse, without shame, with all the security of candor, all the
serene confidence of an exalted soul, she wrote to M. de Létorière the
letter which we have already seen, to offer him her hand.

Happily for him, and for Mlle. de Soissons, Létorière comprehended all
the grandeur and all the devotion of such a love. Satiated with too easy
successes, he consecrated himself from that time to the adoration of the
young girl who so nobly confided to him her future.

He often saw the princess alone, and in Martha's presence. Mlle. de
Soissons desired that he should at once ask her hand of Madame
Rohan-Soubise, purely as a matter of form. The young girl held in
reserve her rights and her invincible will, awaiting the decision of her
aunt.

As a man of honor and good sense, Létorière gave Mlle. de Soissons to
understand, that according to the loss or gain of the important lawsuit
which was still pending against the dukes of Brunswick-Oëls and the
prince of Brandebourg-Bareuth, he should or should not be recognized as
of princely blood; and if successful, that he would have a fortune equal
to the support of that rank. In his judgment, it would be better to wait
the issue of this lawsuit, before applying to Madame Rohan-Soubise.

If it were gained, his position would be so eminent that no reasonable
objection could be made to his marriage with the princess Julie; if it
were lost, it would then be time to dispense with the consent of Mlle.
de Soissons' family; but there was no need of uselessly and prematurely
provoking publicity, which is always mortifying. Such was the opinion of
M. de Létorière. The princess Julie took the opposite view; her
resolute character could not accommodate itself to such temporizing. The
Marquis proposed to leave it to the judgment of the king, who continued
to bestow upon him proofs of the most touching goodness.

Mlle. de Soissons accepted this arbitration. Louis XV. approved of
Létorière's delicacy, and promised to write to the French ambassador
at Vienna, to push forward his just claims.

A month before, the good Dominique had gone to Vienna, in order to get
precise information in regard to the dispositions of the members of the
Aulic Council, called to decide, finally, this important lawsuit which
had already lasted nearly a century.

One can imagine with how much impatience Létorière awaited the return
of the old professor. On the issue of his cause, his marriage with Mlle.
de Soissons might almost be said to rest.




CHAPTER VII

THE LAWSUIT


At the time of which we write, M. de Létorière occupied a charming
detached house, whose garden opened on the ramparts, not far from the
Pavilion of Hanover, one of the dependencies of the dwelling of the
Marshal Richelieu.

The habitation of the Marquis resembled much more a palacette, as it was
then called, than a chateau. Everything therein was elegant, sumptuous,
mysterious and retired. In the summer, great trees enclosed the garden
with a girdle of verdure impenetrable to the eye; in the winter, an
immense curtain of ivy, very artistically disposed on trellises built in
the form of trees, rose above the walls, and replaced the foliage of the
warmer season.

On the day we speak of, Létorière was in his library awaiting the
expected arrival of Dominique from Vienna.

The princes against whom the Marquis was at law, had very great
influence in Germany. The Aulic Council was said to be in their
interests, and single-handed, Létorière had to wrestle against these
formidable adversaries.

The old professor, when he set out, was furnished with a letter from the
king to the French Ambassador at Vienna. Louis XV. informed his
representative that he took great interest in M. de Létorière's
success in the lawsuit, and ordered him to favor with all his power the
secret inquiries of the Marquis's confidential agent.

Soon the noise of a post-chaise was heard, and immediately after
Jean-Francois Dominique entered Létorière's library.

"Well! Dominique, have we any chance?" said the Marquis, cordially
embracing him.

"I doubt it . . . Monsieur the Marquis." . . .

"Are these Aulic councillors intractable?"

"Alas! I think so, but for the recollection of Alcibiades, who, after
all, seduced Tisapherne! . . . But I believe these Germans yet more
rebellious, yet more unapproachable than that distrustful satrap!"

"And who are these councillors? Have you gained some information about
them?"

"I have enough. . . . I have too much information! That is why I am so
grieved. These councillors are three in number: the Baron Henferester,
the greatest huntsman and most redoubtable drinker in all Germany; a
Nimrod who only quits his forests to sit in the council twice a week.
Then there is the Doctor Aloysius Sphex, a learned commentator of
Persius, I believe, always bristling with Latin, like a porcupine; and
lastly, the Seigneur Flachsinfingen, an ostrich-like gourmand, governed
by his wife, the leanest, most peevish, sourest Protestant that ever
wore a Bible attached to her side by a silver chain . . ."

"Your portraits are drawn by a masterly hand, Dominique; they are
sufficiently unattractive. And these gentlemen of the council are
absolutely in the interest of the German princes?"

"Yes, entirely so. In this single case these three councillors, who
detest each other cordially, undoubtedly on account of the difference of
their tastes, are of one mind,--a rare thing, for generally the support
of one would be sufficient to cause the opposition of the others."

"And the German princes?" . . .

"Have as much hope of gaining, as you have chances of losing; for you
pass at Vienna for something worse than a demon."

"I do! . . . You are joking, Dominique!"

"I wish I were! but it is only too true. . . . Your reputation as a man
of gallantry, a voluptuary, a flirt, and a sybarite, has reached even
Vienna; in the eyes of these grave Germans, you are a Will'-o'-the-wisp,
a sprite, a sylph,--something, in short, as brilliant as subtle,
unaccountable and dangerous. Two centuries ago, they would have received
you with a power of exorcisms and holy water . . . but in this
philosophic and enlightened age, they will content themselves with
shutting the door in your face, and saying _vade retro_, for they would
think you are the devil himself; and unhappily your lawsuit will be
definitely settled in two weeks by these three judges! . . . Ah! may
Pluto . . . have them some day for their comfort!" added Dominique, by
way of imprecation.

After a long silence, the Marquis rose, wrote a few words, rang his
bell, and gave his letter to a servant, saying:

"Carry this to the house of Madame Rohan-Soubise; ask for Dame Martha,
and wait for an answer."

"This evening I shall start for Vienna," said Létorière to his
professor.

"You mean, then, to go in search of adventures, to seduce your judges?
It is true that Alcibiades ate the black broth of the Spartans, made a
centaur of himself in Thrace, and crowned himself with violets, while he
sang voluptuous songs to the effeminate Ionians."

"I have no intention of fascinating my judges, my old friend; but in
some cases it is better to see with one's own eyes."

The conversation between Dominique and his former pupil continued for
some time, and turned upon the particular circumstances of the lawsuit.

At the end of half an hour, the lackey returned, bringing a note for
Létorière, who cried out in great astonishment:

"What can she be thinking of? But if she wishes, let it be so . . ."

Then he ordered his carriage and went out, praying Dominique to hasten
the preparations for his departure that very evening.




CHAPTER VIII

THE CHATEAU SOUBISE


Four persons were chatting in a charming little boudoir, inlaid with the
red lacker of Coromandel. The furniture of this delightful room, one of
the marvels of the Rohan-Soubise Chateau, was covered with brocade of
silver ground with large designs in crimson. The curtains of the windows
and doors, made of similar material, fell in graceful folds. A Japanese
vase of gold, purple and blue, three feet in height, filled with
flowers, and placed before the window, resembled an enamelled screen of
the most brilliant colors. On _étagères_ of massive silver, delicately
chased and inlaid with charming coral medallions, the work of some
famous Florentine artist, were to be seen a quantity of Chinese
knick-knacks, impossible to describe on account of their oddity.

Near a fireplace of most beautiful red antique marble, whose grate was
ornamented with a garland of flowers and fruit, made of precious stones,
was a little bed _à la duchesse_, a perfect miniature, with curtains,
canopies, and coverlets, and feathered plumes on the dais; nothing was
wanting. A very diminutive black spaniel, marked with tan, whose long
silken hair was coquettishly braided with cherry and silver ribbons,
slept on the couch, half hidden under the eider-down cover. A saucer of
royal old blue Sèvres china, containing macaroons, crumbled into milk
of almonds, awaited the delicate _Puff_ on his awaking.

Madame, the Princess of Rohan-Soubise, her niece, Mlle. de Soissons, the
Count de Lugeac and the Abbé of Arcueil, were the actors in the
following scene:

M. de Lugeac had just come in.

"How much you lost, madame, by not being at the brilliant concert
yesterday! you would have witnessed the most extraordinary thing in the
world!"

"What was it?" demanded the abbé. "Have Jean Jacques and Arouet
embraced each other in public? Or have they sung the praises of the
chancellor?"

"Tell us at once of this fine affair," said Madame Rohan-Soubise.

"Yesterday, at the concert, M. de Létorière was applauded--yes,
applauded to the skies" . . . said M. de Lugeac, with an evident feeling
of jealousy.

"Applauded? As M. de Létorière is neither a prince of the blood, nor a
comedian, at least so far as I know, I do not see what title he has to
be applauded," . . . dryly said Madame Rohan-Soubise, who, without known
motive, and undoubtedly by presentiment, cordially detested the Marquis.

Mlle. de Soissons blushed deeply, and broke a thread of her embroidery
in an impatient movement which was not perceived by her aunt.

"M. de Létorière was applauded for his coat," . . . replied the count.

"What a ridiculous dress! . . . This fine Marquis must always have
people talking about him," said the abbé.

"Not ridiculous . . . but in truth so magnificent, and at the same time
so elegant, that even I, who will not acknowledge myself a strong friend
of the Marquis, will be generous enough to allow, that I never in all my
life saw anything more charming than he, dressed as he was. . . . But
when one devotes one's self to such follies, it is at least satisfactory
to obtain such success." . . .

"Tell us about this miraculous toilette," said Madame Rohan-Soubise; "I
will tell you afterwards another story about M. de Létorière, which
will furnish a curious contrast to all his present magnificence."

"And I, also," . . . said the abbé. "No later than this morning, the
Archbishop of Paris told me a hundred tales of this fine Marquis!"

"To finish about this toilette, madame," said M. de Lugeac. "After the
first part of the concert was over, Létorière was seen entering the
box of Judge Solar, ambassador of his majesty the King of
Sardinia,"--and M. de Lugeac inclined his head towards Mlle. de
Soissons, a cousin of this king. "The box was empty; the Marquis
remained there a few moments to observe the audience. He wore a coat of
plain, straw-colored _moiré_, with cuffs of changeable gold and
sea-green stuff; his shoulder-knot was of gold and green; you see,
madame, that so far, nothing could be more simple." . . .

"The shades are well enough selected, we will allow," said the abbé.

"But," continued the count, "what was truly marvellous was the trimming
of this coat. First, the Marquis's Steinkerque order was fastened with a
magnificent emerald buckle; then his large and small buttons, and even
the mounting of his sword, were in magnificent opals, which threw green,
blue and orange rays, almost as brilliant as the diamonds which
encircled these superb stones."[1]

"But ornaments like those must be worth more than twenty thousand
crowns!" cried the abbé.

"I can well believe it," replied M. de Lugeac, "and it is a foolish
extravagance; but it is always so whenever the Marquis appears in that
box, so magnificently dressed, his hair, lightly snowed like hoar-frost
with unbleached powder, falling in his own fashion in waving curls on
each side of his temples, he always excites in the public a kind of
ecstasy of admiration, succeeded by a murmur more and more approving,
until at last almost universal bravos burst forth."

"But, in truth, this foolish apotheosis of the beauty of a man is but a
pagan ovation," said Madame Rohan-Soubise, with a contemptuous smile.
"Besides, what is quite as amusing as the enthusiasm of the Parisians
for the charming graces of M. de Létorière, is the profound admiration
he has for himself. The vanity of this new Narcissus has been, they say,
so ridiculously exalted for some time past, that he has become quite
invincible; there are numbers of desperate and weeping beauties, who in
vain call with loud cries upon this disdainful Celadon. Undoubtedly no
woman now appears to him worthy of his attentions."

"Or perhaps, madame, he has found one worthy of his love," said Mlle. de
Soissons, raising her noble and beautiful face, radiant with goodness,
love and pride, as she listened to this indirect eulogium on the
fidelity of the Marquis.

Madame Rohan-Soubise, not perceiving her niece's emotion, continued:

"But, my dear princess, if this be so, we ought to know this phoenix!
For discretion is not the rôle of M. de Létorière. No, no, believe
me, if he is fixed, as you say, then his choice is so unworthy of him
that he is obliged to conceal it from the world."

"Perhaps, on the contrary, it is the world who, in M. de Létorière's
eyes, is not worthy of knowing his secret," replied Mlle. de Soissons.

This second repartee struck her aunt, who answered:

"Truly, my dear Julie, it is easy to see that you are not acquainted
with M. de Létorière, since you defend him!"

"We speak now of generalities, madame; but rest assured that if I were
obliged to defend any one who interested me, I should do it boldly and
without dissembling, when the time came," said Mlle. de Soissons, with a
peculiar accent.

"Oh, I know you are very courageous in that way, my dear child; your
friends are truly your friends; but on the contrary, your enemies are
also your enemies! You must allow me also to have my preferences and my
antipathies. . . . Frankly, M. de Létorière is firmly fixed in the
latter; I hate everything which savors of intrigue and concealment. This
Marquis had nothing, five years ago, but his cape and sword. I ask
myself how it is possible that he can now have ornaments on his coat
worth twenty thousand crowns, a handsome establishment, the finest
horses in the world, and is enabled to play as deeply as a large
landholder?"

"I believe, madame, that those who ask those questions know very well
how to answer them," said Julie, dryly.

"For myself, I declare to you, my dear, that I should find it very
difficult," replied Madame de Rohan-Soubise, with the most natural air;
. . . "but if I had the misfortune to be one of the friends of the
_opulent_ M. de Létorière, I should desire nothing better for his
reputation than to see him burned as a sorcerer, however incredulous I
may be about the philosopher's stone."

At this last sarcasm Mlle. de Soissons looked at the clock with a kind
of eager impatience, but said nothing.

"His magnificence is truly inconceivable," said M. de Lugeac. "It is
true that some say he is fortunate at play; others affirm that the king
and Madame Dubarry favor him in every way, and have gained for him two
very important lawsuits; besides, it is evident that his Majesty is
bewitched with him, as is all the world; and truly it may be said that
everything which this Marquis touches is turned to gold. . . . If you
will believe it, madame, he has brought into fashion a poor devil of a
tailor, who gave him credit in his earlier days; the Marquis does not
conceal it, but speaks of it quite freely. This Landry, of The Golden
Scissors, whose stores are brilliant, who is now one of the richest
artizans of Paris, owes his unlooked-for good fortune only to the
influence of these words, repeated by all the city: '_He is the tailor
of the elegant Létorière!_'"

"Truly!" said Madame Rohan-Soubise, impatiently, "all these stories
resemble the tales of Perrault."

"They are much more like fairy tales," replied M. de Lugeac. "And then
the description of his bedchamber! they say that his toilet set is
entirely of gold chased by Gouttière, and enriched with precious
stones." . . .

"And I," said the abbé, "I have heard a thousand times repeated by the
Archbishop of Paris that M. de Létorière was almost the serpent of the
terrestrial paradise. . . . 'If it were an affair of the government of
Paris,' said this good prelate to me this morning, 'I would mask him
with a cowl, like a black penitent, to hide his eyes, and choke the
sound of his voice; for, in a question of precedence which interested
one of my relations, this tempter has turned upside down my whole
chapter-house, and fascinated my prebendaries so that they speak of
nothing but him.'"

At this moment the door of the boudoir was thrown open, and a
valet-de-chambre announced with a loud voice: _Monsieur the Marquis de
Létorière!_

"M. de Létorière in my house! I have never received him! What
audacity!" cried Madame de Rohan-Soubise, with as much astonishment as
anger.


[Footnote 1: See for these details, and for other biographical
particulars of Létorière, the charming _Souvenirs de Madame la
Marquise de Créquy._]




CHAPTER IX

THE DEPARTURE


At the announcement of the Marquis, Madame de Rohan-Soubise had risen;
the count and the abbé did the same,--and so also did the princess
Julie.

The Marquis found these four persons present: Madame Rohan-Soubise, in
full dress, arrogant, irritated, haughty; the abbé, by way of
reassuring himself, caressed _Puff_, who, awaking with a start, whined
a little; the count, leaning his elbow on the mantle-piece, played
carelessly with his watch-chain; Mlle. de Soissons, calm and resolved,
supported herself with one hand on her embroidery frame, and looked at
Létorière with an air at once tender and grateful.

The Marquis had hardly respectfully saluted Madame Rohan-Soubise, when
she turned towards M. de Lugeac, with a gesture of supreme disdain, and
asked him, "Who is this gentleman?"

The count, very much embarrassed, hesitated to answer, when the Marquis
sharply said, "M. de Létorière absolves M. de Lugeac from being
responsible for him to Madame de Rohan-Soubise."

"It was at my request, madame, that M. the Marquis of Létorière has
been kind enough to come here," said the princess Julie, in a firm and
decided voice.

"At your request? . . . yours . . . Julie?" cried Madame Rohan-Soubise,
at the height of astonishment. "'Tis impossible!"

"However _unknown_ I may unhappily be to Madame de Rohan-Soubise, I dare
to hope that she will understand that the formal orders of Mlle. de
Soissons have been necessary to bring me to the Chateau Soubise--an
honor which, until now, I have at least had the modesty or the good
taste never to aspire to," replied the Marquis, in a tone of marked
irony.

"Princess Julie . . . explain yourself . . . this has already continued
too long!" cried Madame de Rohan-Soubise, imperiously.

The count and the abbé made a movement to retire, but Mlle. de Soissons
said to them:

"Have the goodness to remain, gentlemen, that you may be witnesses to
what I wish to say to madame."

The two gentlemen bowed respectfully. Mlle. de Soissons then addressed
her aunt: "I have begged M. de Létorière to come here, madame, that I
might tell him before you, and you before him, my irrevocable
intentions. I am an orphan, and free in all my actions when they are not
unworthy of my birth; but you are my relative, madame, and I know what
is due to you, and I cannot better prove my respect than in imparting to
you a resolution on which depends my destiny." . . .

With the exception of the Marquis, the actors in this strange scene were
lost in astonishment. Madame de Rohan-Soubise, stupefied at the language
of the princess Julie, could not believe what she heard.

Mlle. de Soissons continued:

"I have offered my hand to M. de Létorière; he has accepted it." . . .

"You have offered your hand!!" . . . cried Madame de Rohan-Soubise.
"Princess Julie, you have lost your reason . . . or is this all an
ill-judged pleasantry?"

"Ah! mademoiselle," said Létorière, with a reproachful accent, seeing
the young girl thus breaking the promise she had made to him, to wait
the issue of the lawsuit before making a final decision.

The princess Julie turned towards him:

"You will soon learn why I have acted thus," said she; and she added,
addressing her aunt with a solemn air, "I have not lost my reason; and
what I say is serious. . . . Before God, who hears me, before you,
madame, before you, Count de Lugeac, and before you, Abbé d'Arcueil, I,
Julie Victorie de Soissons, swear to have no other husband but the
Marquis of Létorière here before us;" and she tendered him her hand
with a gesture of grandeur and simplicity.

The Marquis took the charming hand, which he kissed with the most
respectful and lively tenderness.

This scene was so unexpected, so like a thunderbolt, that Madame
Rohan-Soubise remained for a moment mute, interrogating with her eyes
the count and the abbé, not less astonished.

"And I," replied the Marquis, "swear to consecrate my life to the noble
princess who has honored me with her choice. . . ."

"And I, with all the authority which my relationship gives me,"
impetuously cried Madame de Rohan-Soubise, coming out of her stupor, "I
declare to you, mademoiselle, that this shameful alliance is impossible,
and that it shall never take place!"

"The honor which Mlle. de Soissons deigns to do me, madame, prevents me
from answering your outrageous words," said the Marquis, much moved.

The Princess Julie replied, addressing herself to her aunt:

"With the delicacy which ought to characterize the man to whom I intrust
my destiny, M. de Létorière wished to await the issue of his lawsuit,
which the Aulic Council of the empire is about to decide, before
accepting formally the hand which I have freely offered him; if he gains
his lawsuit he will be recognized as of a princely house, and then there
will be no difference of rank, as it is called; but if this proposition
was noble and delicate, I was a coward to accept it; I pretended to
recognize exigencies which I do not admit; I pretended to wait the
favorable issue of the lawsuit before making my decision. But that did
not suit me; I meant loyally and openly, madame, to declare to you my
unalterable resolution, whether the lawsuit be gained or lost. M. de
Létorière starts to-night for Vienna. . . . This evening I shall go to
the Abbey of Montmartre, and there await his return; you will
understand, madame, that it is impossible for me to live any longer in
your house." . . .

"Undoubtedly the Chateau Soubise is disagreeable to you, mademoiselle;
yet you must either leave it to make a marriage worthy of your family,
or enter a convent forever." . . .

"At least, madame, his majesty allows me to be free to retire at once to
the lady-superior of Montmartre," said Mlle. de Soissons, handing to
Madame Rohan-Soubise a letter which she took from her pocket.

"The hand-writing of the king!" cried Madame Rohan-Soubise.

"Yesterday I wrote to his majesty, who is acquainted with my resolution;
read his answer, which is addressed to you, madame":


"MY COUSIN: For sufficient reasons, I desire that Mlle. de Soissons may
enter the Abbey of Montmartre until further orders.


"Your affectionate

"LOUIS."


Madame de Rohan-Soubise, astonished beyond expression, read the letter
twice.

"Wonderful!" said she, with concentrated spite; "you have prevailed,
mademoiselle, but his majesty can reconsider . . . undoubtedly will
reconsider, a determination which has been surprised from him. . . . And
I shall go immediately to the king."

"I believe that I am sufficiently acquainted with his majesty's
intentions, madame, to be certain of the futility of your application,"
said Mlle. de Soissons. Then she offered her hand to M. de Létorière,
saying: "Adieu, my friend; go to Vienna . . . I will wait for you at
Montmartre Abbey."

That very evening M. de Létorière started for Vienna.




CHAPTER X

THE GOVERNOR OF HENFERESTER


Ten leagues north of Vienna is the vast manor of Henferester--an old
pile blackened by time, its walls covered with ivy, its roof with moss;
it seemed deserted and abandoned. The main structure, and a great tower
which faced the east, were almost in ruins. The only habitable part of
the chateau was the western tower; through some hedges of box, pushing
in every direction over the esplanade, which, surrounded by lime-trees,
extended before the door of the castle, could be seen traces of an
ancient parterre overgrown with brambles and parasitic plants.

Autumn was drawing towards its close; the foliage of the great clumps of
trees which fringed the horizon had begun to put on their rich purple
tints. The sky was gray and rainy; the air damp and cold; night
approached. The high and narrow window which gave light to the basement
of the tower was suddenly illuminated; the stained glass windows,
although somewhat blackened by smoke, shone brilliantly, and the
coat-of-arms of the lords of Henferester glittered in the darkness
steadily deepening.

The lower floor of the tower formed one immense circular room; it was at
once the dining-hall and the kitchen of the Governor of Henferester; the
upper stories contained many dilapidated chambers, which were reached by
a rough and narrow spiral stone staircase, the ascent of which was aided
by a rope attached to the damp wall by rings of rusty iron.

A great fire was burning in the immense kitchen chimney; a copper lamp
with three branches suspended from the smoky rafters of the ceiling,
lighted the place; on the walls, whose plaster was in patches, were hung
deer-horns, which supported guns and hunting-knives, wild boars' tusks
and hoofs, and several wolves' heads, stuffed.

The floor, trodden hard like the threshing-floor of a barn, was strewn
with hatchelled straw, by way of a carpet. In one corner an enormous
hogshead of beer, between two beams, was on tap. Above it were two
barrels of different sizes. One contained Rhine wine, the other, which
was smaller, the kirchenwasser of the Black Forest. On either side of
the barrels were ranged pewter mugs of various sizes. Near by were two
great firkins set against the wall, one full of salted bacon, the other
of sauer-kraut pickled in vinegar. An iron fork and spoon hanging over
these two firkins, formed, so to speak, pendants to the pewter mugs
ranged above the barrels.

Lastly, a kneading-trough, containing a dozen loaves of bread as big as
mill-wheels, completed the list of culinary furniture.

Except a quarter of venison, which was roasting before an enormous fire
in the chimney, and a great pot in which the bacon and sauer-kraut were
boiling, there was nothing in the room to indicate that it was a
kitchen. There were visible neither cooking-stoves, nor moulds, nor
saucepans of various forms, so dear to _gourmands._

As for utensils, there was only one gridiron hanging before the mouth of
the oven, which was wide open, under the mantle-piece, and a great
turnspit operated by a dog.

A quarter of venison, like that before the fire, was hanging, all
bloody, on an iron hook near the door.

Thanks to the combined odors of the venison, the bacon, the sauer-kraut,
the beer, the wine, and the kirchenwasser, the atmosphere of the room
was so thick, or perhaps we may say, so nourishing, that a very little
of it would have satisfied a delicate stomach.

Without, the rain, mingled with hail, fell violently, pelting the
windows.

Two white-haired old Germans, clothed in loose gray coats, fastened at
the waist by belts of buffalo hide, were preparing the repast of the
lord of Henferester, who had been out hunting since the morning, and had
not yet returned.

These preparations were simple. The domestics drew towards the
fireplace a long and massive oak table; at the upper end they placed
the master's oaken seat, coarsely sculptured with his coat-of-arms, the
back carried up to form a canopy, and to which no cushion gave ease.

Before this seat they placed a plate, or rather a great dish of silver,
a piece of bread weighing about two pounds, and three tankards, also of
silver, which served at once as glasses and bottles. The first, destined
for beer, held two pints; the second, for wine, one pint, the third, for
kirchenwasser, half a pint.

These tankards were generally filled a second time during the meal.
Table-cloths, napkins, and covers were things merely remembered, and
were deemed ridiculous superfluities. Hunters of that day always carried
two knives in their belts; one straight and long, for stabbing the
beast; the other, thick, curved, and a little larger than an ordinary
table-knife, was used for cutting him up. This last they invariably
employed for carving their meat at table.

The servants then laid pewter plates and pieces of bread at each side of
the table. These inferior places were reserved for the servitors of the
baron, according to their rank.

The lord of Henferester, faithful to old and patriarchal traditions, ate
with his domestics. On his right was the place of Erhard Trusches, his
huntsman; on the left that of Selbitz, his major-domo.

This last-named personage, having set the sauer-kraut to boil, and the
venison to roast, aided Link, an old groom, in preparing the table.

As to women, they were never seen in the castle. Every Saturday, old
Wilhelmina, the minister's housekeeper, came to make and bake the bread
for the week, while the baron was at the council at Vienna. Wednesday,
the other council day, she put in order the linen of the castle, always
in the absence of the governor, who regarded the fair sex with profound
dislike.

"The master is late to-night," said the major-domo, sadly looking at the
quarter of venison, which was beginning to dry up.

"The night is dark, the rain is falling heavily, Master Selbitz . . .
perhaps the chase will have carried the governor into the forest of
Harterassen. . . . Master Erhard Trusches sent word this morning by Karl,
the dog-keeper, that the baron was to hunt a wild boar; . . . and wild
boars always start in the woods of Ferstenfak, gain the plain of Marais,
return to their lair in the forest of Harterassen, and then are captured
at the pond of the priory. All that would make a run of at least eight
leagues, and as many to return, Master Selbitz." . . .

"And what with the night and the rain, and the bad roads of the forest,
that is a long way. . . . But listen, Link," . . . said the major-domo,
putting his hand to his ear; "is not that the sound of the governor's
trumpet?"

"No, Master Selbitz, it is the wind blowing the weathercock." . . .

"What time is it?" asked the major-domo; for clocks were almost as
unknown in the castle as at Otaheite.

"It must be between six and seven, Master Selbitz, for Elphin, the
governor's roan horse, has been calling for his grain for some
time. . . . Hark! listen! do you hear him? Patience, patience, old
Elphin!" said the groom, coming back from the door. . . . "When your
companions, Kol and Lipper, get back, you will have your supper, but
not before, you old glutton!"

"This time it surely is the governor's trumpet," cried the
major-domo. . . . "God be praised! What weather! Come! run and hold
the master's stirrup. Link, while I go and throw some pine cones on the
fire, to make a blaze."

"That is certainly the governor's trumpet," said Link, after listening
attentively, . . . "but he does not sound a joyful flourish, or the
retreat. . . . Ah, Master Selbitz, bad luck, bad luck!"

"The better reason for not keeping him waiting,--go--hurry!"

The groom ran out. . . . Selbitz, having brightened the fire, put on his
lord's silver plate a letter with a great red seal, which an express had
brought from Vienna during the day.

At this moment they heard the loud snapping of a whip, and a stentorian
and harsh voice, crying: "Go to the black devil! you cursed dogs!
Erhard, see if the piebald horse eats well; for the day has been a hard
one!"

Then they heard the clatter of great iron-heeled and spurred boots; the
door opened, and the lord of Henferester entered in the midst of a dozen
dogs, covered with mud and streaming with rain, who rushed into the
kitchen, and crowded before the fire to dry themselves.

The baron allowed them this privilege as much for love of the canine
race, as for his own interest, knowing that dogs who go into their
kennels shivering and cold, often fall sick.

The lord of Henferester, a man of enormous size, and from forty-five to
fifty years old, seemed to possess herculean strength. On entering, he
threw his old felt hat into the kneading-trough. His bright red hair was
cut short; his russet beard, which he shaved only on council days, was
so thick that it covered nearly all his face. His features, strongly
marked, and tanned by exposure to the open air, were hard, yet not
devoid of a certain nobility.

His old green jacket was soaked with rain, and buttoned up to his chin.
His deer-skin breeches were black with age, and his great thick boots,
covered with mud, reached more than half-way up his thighs; a leather
belt held his hunting-knives, with horn handles. He carried across his
breast a great trumpet of tarnished copper, and held in his large, hairy
hand, a whip and a carbine.

Having given this weapon and the trumpet to his major-domo, who hung
them upon the wall, the master approached the fire with a discontented
air, distributed several rude kicks among his dogs, to make them move
out of his way, and threw himself heavily in his chair, saying to his
hounds, sharply:

"Get out, you lazy, clumsy wretches! you are much more worthy to turn
the spit than to follow the chase of a noble animal. . . . To give out
after a five-hours' run, and all because the haunt of the wild boar is
too brambly! You have, it seems, become very delicate! Hum! and even
you, old Ralph!" he added, with a furious look, aiming a kick at the dog
thus addressed.

The major-domo, seeing the humor of his master, tried to calm him by
recalling his more successful sport.

"I can understand that my lord may be displeased when he has had bad
luck, for he is not used to it; but--"

"Well, well," said the baron, in a harsh tone, "take the venison from
the spit, and give me my supper, for I am as hungry as the devil. This
boar led us through the forest of Harterassen; then the dogs gave out
before a hedge so thick that one should have the hide of a wild boar
itself to penetrate it." . . .

"My lord sees, then, that it is not altogether the fault of his brave
dogs. But my lord is wet through; if he would but change his
clothes." . . .

"Change my clothes! and why would you have me change, Master Selbitz the
tender-skinned?" cried the governor, wrathfully; "do you take me for a
silly woman, for a Frenchman? Do I change my clothes when I return from
the chase? Do my dogs change? do my horses change?"

"No, of course not, my lord, but your clothes smoke on your body, like
Dame Wilhelmina's tub when she is making the washing lye." . . .

"That shows that they are drying, and the dampness is leaving them!"

"But, my lord". . .

"But, hold your tongue, Master Selbitz the blockhead, Master Selbitz the
babbler, and give me a mug of kirchenwasser."

Then, seeing the letter which was on his plate, the baron asked:

"What is that, Selbitz?"

"A letter which Count Stasfield's carrier has brought."

"Oh! let business go to the devil! Tis enough to go to Vienna twice a
week," said the governor, breaking the seal of the letter.

It read thus:


"I wish to inform you, my dear baron, that the French Marquis M. de
Létorière will arrive to-day at your house to converse with you on the
subject of his lawsuit; I need not remind you of the formal promise you
have made me to add your vote to those of your colleagues, in favor of
the Duke of Brandenbourg. Believe me, my dear baron, etc."


"And what the devil is this Frenchman coming here for?" cried the
governor, in a passion. "By the Holy Kings of Cologne, am I never to
have one moment of repose? Here is this beau of Versailles coming to
rouse me like a wild boar from his lair. . . . In my opinion his lawsuit
is lost . . . totally lost. . . . What does he want more? Does he
believe that I am going to interest myself about him? An impudent little
fellow, who embroiders in tambour, and who uses, they say, rouge and
patches! One of these men of gallantry, as corrupt as effeminate, always
hanging on the skirts of the women! But, by the infernal, I can't escape
from this Marquis! If he comes, I shall be obliged to offer him
hospitality; it is fifteen leagues from here to Vienna, and I can't send
him back without seeing him! I wish the devil had all the lawyers and
lawsuits! and he's coming to-night! We must offer him a bed; but where
shall he sleep? Everything is dilapidated here, and this beauty will
come in a litter, like a woman in labor!"

The baron stamped his foot in anger, and calling his major-domo, said
with an air of vexation:

"Perhaps we shall have a Frenchman here to-night--a Marquis--a
pleader;--in such weather we cannot let him go back to Vienna. Where can
we put him, him and his suite? For this dandy undoubtedly travels with
his train of hair-dressers, bathers and perfumers!"

"Faith, my lord," said the major-domo, scratching his ear, "there is
only the rat-chamber, where the rain does not come in."

"Well then, put him in the rat-chamber." Then the baron added, with a
sort of bitter irony: "In order to convey a brilliant impression of the
hospitality bestowed at the castle of Henferester, and especially that
this delicate visitor may have all his comforts, don't forget,
major-domo, to cover his bed with the most beautiful silk curtains, to
furnish it with eider-down, and the finest linens of Friesland; to beat
well the Turkey carpet; to put perfumed candles into the silver-gilt
candlesticks, and to warm his bed with charcoal of aloes wood. Do you
understand, major-domo?"

"Yes, yes, my lord," said Martin Selbitz, busily occupying himself with
dishing up the quarter of venison, the bacon and the sauer-kraut, and
rejoiced at the peasantry of his master; "yes, my lord, be easy; I
understand you; the straw of his bed shall be fresh, and well stirred
up; the woollen coverlid well beaten, the floor well swept, the curtains
and tapestry of cobwebs well shaken, and the shutters set wide open,
that the moon may throw a bright light into the chamber of your guest;
in short, if he is so delicate and sensitive to cold, his bed shall be
warmed,--by the dog of the turnspit."

The baron could not help laughing at the factiousness of his
major-domo, who had so exactly described the rat-chamber, which was very
like his own apartment, so indifferent was he to the commonest
conveniences of life.

"To supper!" said the governor, drawing up his chair and taking his
hunting-knife from his belt.

At this moment was heard the sound of the trumpet, habitually used by
German postilions.

"Perhaps it is that confounded Marquis," cried the baron. "Hullo,
Erhard, Selbitz, run to receive him!"

The governor, rising heavily from his seat, went to the door, saying in
a growling tone: "He must have a devilish strong body to travel such
weather as this. . . . Bah, shut up in his post-chaise, he is much
better off than he will be in the castle. Let us see, then, this
beautiful darling, this beau, this most effeminate of all the
effeminates in the Court of France."

And the governor went forward to fulfil, in spite of himself, the duties
of hospitality towards his guest.




CHAPTER XI

THE SUPPER


Contrary to the expectation of the baron, Létorière dismounted from a
horse, instead of getting out of a chaise, and gave his animal in charge
of the postilion.

The master of Henferester understood the duties of his position too well
not to accord a polite reception to a gentleman who had come to ask a
favor of him. He saw, moreover, that Létorière was much less
effeminate than he had been led to believe. A certain amount of energy
was necessary to bring him fifteen leagues on a post-horse, in a dark
night and frightful weather.

When the Marquis entered, he was nearly suffocated by the _substantial_
atmosphere of which we have spoken, to which was now added the strong
odor of the kennel, exhaling from the crowded hounds. At sight of the
stranger, they began to bay with marvellous accord.

The Marquis stopped, seemed to listen to their howlings with unspeakable
satisfaction, and said in very good German:

"On my faith, baron, I have never heard dogs with better throats than
yours. By St. Hubert! here is something to make the true huntsman's
heart beat!" Then, without noticing the governor, he began to examine in
detail, with serious interest, the qualities of the dogs who approached
him; and exclaimed, in a tone of increasing admiration: "Good dogs!
brave dogs! our dogs of Normandy and Poitou are not so good as these;
yours have better heads, are better formed about the flanks. See them!
They are the most beautiful dogs of their kind I ever saw in my life!
Come here, my fine fellow!" And Létorière took a great white dog,
marked with black, by his two forepaws, looked at him with the eye of a
connoisseur for several minutes, and, with an air of approbation, said
to the baron, who stood by astonished: "That's one of your best dogs,
baron; that's one of your blood-hounds, isn't it? He has served you a
long time; so much the better; years improve blood-hounds."

Confounded by the assurance and volubility of the Marquis, the governor,
a downright huntsman, too proud of his dogs to take offence at any
attention which they excited, and, above all, struck by the remarks of
Létorière about the blood-hound, answered almost mechanically:

"But who told you that this dog Moick was my blood-hound?"

"How, who told me, baron? First the mark of the collator which is to be
seen on his neck, on his worn hair, as clearly as the marks of the
breastplate on a draft-horse; and then his deep and hollow voice, which
proves also that he never barks. All this is more than enough to
indicate a blood-hound to one who is not a novice in the brotherhood of
joyous huntsmen. And then what a well-developed nose! and the
chase-bone, as salient as a linger! Believe me, baron, in all your life
you will never find a finer blood-hound! make the most of him! Ah well!
I see there a quarter of venison, which is getting cold; don't let us
wait any longer, I am as hungry as forty devils! You shall see how I'll
play the knife and fork! Give us your hand, baron! By St. Hubert, our
common patron, you are a brave old German; I was told so, and now I'm
sure of it."

"Monsieur, may I know to whom I have the honor of speaking?" demanded
the baron, more and more astonished at the cavalier manner of the
stranger.

"That's right, baron. My name is Létorière; I have come to speak with
you about my lawsuit . . . But as we must see clearly in this chaos,
blacker than hell, and as it is now night, we will wait for the
day . . . that is to say, to-morrow morning, before talking about
it . . . Now, let's go to table, since I have invited myself without
ceremony. Excuse the rudeness of my manner, but I am a child of the
forests."

The governor was stupefied. He had expected to see a little dandy,
speaking with the tips of his lips, pretentious, scented, delicate, as
ignorant of horses and dogs as a Leipsic shopkeeper; and he found him a
jovial, stanch young fellow, who seemed to know all about hunting, and
whose dress vied in negligence with his own.

The baron felt most favorably disposed towards Létorière. The
admiration which the latter had shown for the dogs, increased the
good-will of the governor for his guest, so that he cordially answered:
"The castle of Henferester is at your disposal, Monsieur; I only wish I
could offer you greater hospitality."

"You are too particular, baron. If you knew me better, you would see
that I could not desire entertainment more in accordance with my tastes.
To the table, baron!" and the Marquis approached the fire.

Létorière had undergone a complete moral and physical transformation.
He who had been applauded at the theatre for the superlative elegance of
his dress, for the grace and charm of his person, now wore an old blue
hunting-coat with a velvet collar faded to dusky red; great boots not
less rough, not less muddy, not less heavily spurred than those of the
German Nimrod. A knot of leather tied his unpowdered hair, disordered by
his journey; his beard was half long, and the delicate whiteness of his
hands was concealed by a tint of soot, which made them look as tanned as
the baron's. In short, everything was changed in the Marquis, even to
the enchanting tone of his voice, now harsh and a little hoarse.

None of these peculiarities escaped the baron.

"Do you know, Erhard," said he in a low tone to his huntsman, "do you
know that this Frenchman immediately recognized old Moick as a
blood-hound, and one of our best dogs?"

"Indeed, my lord!" said Erhard, with a doubting air.

"It is so, Erhard; I begin to think they do know something about the
chase in France."

Then addressing his major-domo, while the Marquis was drying himself at
the fire, the baron said:

"Remove your plates, Selbitz; Frenchmen are not used to our German
manners."

Selbitz began to execute the order to his own discontent, as well as
that of Erhard, when Létorière, fearing to make two enemies so near
the governor by a misunderstood fastidiousness, cried:

"What! baron, you wish me, then, to take my horse and return to Vienna
without any supper! and why the devil do you remove the plates of those
brave men? Am I more of a gentleman than you, that I should be shocked
at your domestic habits?"

"It is our old German custom, it is true," said the baron, "but I
thought that in France . . ."

"Baron, we are now in Germany, at the house of one of the most worthy
representatives of the old nobility of the Empire. The rule of this
house ought to be inviolable; thus, then, my worthy huntsman,"
addressing himself to Erhard Trusches, "and you, my brave director of
the family tuns, hogsheads and barrels, take your places again, with the
consent of the baron, who, I hope, will not refuse me this grace."

At a sign from the baron, the two servants joyfully replaced their
plates at the lower end of the table. The governor pointed to the
Marquis's seat, and all prepared to attack the venison, and the immense
dish of sauer-kraut and bacon which smoked on the table.

The baron plunged his knife into the venison to carve it, when
Létorière, with a grave and solemn air, putting his hand on the
governor's arm,--

"One moment, baron I devil take me if I ever dine without saying
blessing and grace."

The baron frowned, and answered with impatience and embarrassment:

"Since my chaplain died I have almost forgotten the words; but I give
the sense--Well, don't you know the blessing, Erhard?"

"No, my lord," said Erhard, in a peevish tone, "I say it once for the
year, and yesterday was my day for saying it."

"And you, Selbitz?"

"I, my lord! my brother, the minister of Blumenthal, says it for me every
day."

"Ah, baron, are you all Turks? So it will fall to me to say grace."

And the Marquis said in a loud voice, "Great St. Hubert, please to make
the venison fat, the wine good, the appetite ravenous, and the thirst
unquenchable." Then he emptied at one draught the tankard which held a
pint of Rhine wine, wiped his mustaches with the back of his hand, and,
putting the mug on the table, said _Amen._

This pleasantry made the worthy governor almost burst with laughter;
imitating the prowess of his guest, he drank at one breath his cup of
wine, repeated Amen with the voice of a Stentor, and found his solicitor
a jolly good fellow.

The two servants, quite as much tickled as their master by the strange
blessing of the Marquis, nevertheless moderated the expression of their
gayety.

"Selbitz," said the governor, soon animated by the good cheer and the
sallies of Létorière, "go and refill our tankards, and don't forgot
yours and Erhard's; it is a fête to-day at Henferester, in honor of my
guest."

And the baron affectionately tendered his great hand to the Marquis,
whose fingers he rudely squeezed, as much in genuine cordiality as to
show his strength.

Létorière, who, under a delicate exterior, concealed great muscular
strength, answered his pressure quite as roughly. The baron, who had not
expected this proof of his vigor, said, laughing, with an astonished
air:

"A rod of steel is often as strong as a great bar of iron, my guest."

"But unhappily, baron, a great glass will hold more than a little one,"
replied the Marquis.

The wine and the beer began to circulate; the baron saw, with a sort of
national pride, Létorière, after having eaten five or six slices of
venison, bravely attack the sauer-kraut and smoked bacon, of which he
praised the appetizing savor, emptying his two tankards two or three
times, meanwhile.

While satisfying his furious appetite, Létorière had not remained
silent. His lively and natural wit, excited by the good cheer, charmed
by a thousand pleasantries; in a word, Selbitz and Erhard saw, to their
great astonishment, their master, ordinarily so grave and taciturn,
laugh in this one evening more than he had laughed for many years.

The huntsman, recognizing in Létorière an accomplished hunter,
listened religiously to his slightest words, when the baron ordered him
to carry the dogs back to their kennel, and give them their supper. A
second iron pot, destined for the hounds, was taken from the fire.

The major-domo, after removing the dishes, placed upon the table the
tankard of kirchenwasser, an earthen jar full of tobacco, and gave the
baron an old pipe.

The latter filled it, saying to Létorière, with whom he already felt
entirely at ease, "Well! tobacco-smoke won't offend you, Marquis?"

For answer, the Marquis drew from his pocket an enormous pipe, which
bore the marks of long and faithful service, and began to fill it with
familiar ease.

"You smoke then, Marquis!" cried the delighted governor, clapping his
hands with admiration.

"Do people live without smoking, baron? On returning from the chase,
after a good meal, what greater pleasure is there than smoking a pipe
with your feet on the andirons, drinking from time to time a swallow of
kirchenwasser, this savage offspring of the Black Forest, which is, to
my thinking, as much superior to French brandy as a heath-cock is to a
barn-yard fowl?" And after this audacious flattery, the Marquis
enveloped himself in a thick cloud of smoke.

The governor, animated by his frequent libations, and whose head was
not, perhaps, quite so calm and so cool as that of his guest, regarded
the Marquis with a sort of ecstasy; he could not understand how a body
so frail in appearance, was so vigorous in reality; how a Frenchman
could drink and smoke as much as, or more, than he, the _widerkom
vierge_, the subduer of the most redoubtable drinkers of the Empire.

"To the health of your mistress, my guest!" said he gayly to the
Marquis.

"My mistress! that's my gun," said Létorière, stretching himself out
by the fire, and poking it with the toe of his great boot, the soles of
which were an inch thick. "Devil take the women! they cannot bear the
smell of tobacco, of brandy, or of the kennel, without putting a flask
of perfume to their noses. Do you make much account of women, baron?"

"I love better to hear the clatter of spurs than the rustle of
petticoats, my guest; but at my age that is wisdom," said the baron,
more and more astonished to find the Marquis sharing his rustic tastes
and his antipathies to the ridiculous affectations of the fair sex.

"At all ages it is wisdom, baron; and I would give all the love-sick
guitars, all the melancholy lays of the troubadours, for the old trumpet
of a forester."

"Do you know one thing, my guest?" said the baron, striking his mug
against that of the Marquis.

"Say on, baron," replied the Marquis, filling his pipe anew.

"Well! before I saw you, knowing you were coming to interest me about
your lawsuit, which unhappily . . .

"Devil take the lawsuit, baron!" cried Létorière; "the one who speaks
of it this evening shall be condemned to drink a pint of water!"

"So be it, Marquis! Well, before I saw you it seemed to me that I should
much rather go through a bramble bush than to receive you; frankly, I
dreaded your arrival. . . . I believed you a dandy and a beau." . . .

"Thank you, baron! Well, for my part, I believed you to be an Alcindor,
a Cytherean shepherd."

"Now, although I have known you but this evening," resumed the baron, "I
will say to you frankly, that when you quit this poor castle of
Henferester I shall have lost the best companion that a man could have
for a long evening at the fire-side."

"And also to pass a hard day of hunting in the depths of the forest.
Devil take the coxcomb who prefers balls and gallantry to the bottle,
the pipe and hunting. If you wish to prove to me that your dogs are as
good as they are handsome, baron, you will see that I am worthy to
follow them."

"That's right, my guest! To-morrow morning, by daylight, we will be
ready for the chase."

"Let it be as you say, baron; we will speak of the lawsuit day after
to-morrow, not before--remember--the pint of water to him who speaks of
it before."

"Bravo, my guest!" said the baron, "but it is late, and you are
fatigued; old Selbitz will conduct you to your chamber,--that is to say,
a kind of room furnished with a paltry bed, which is all I have to offer
you. . . . My chamber is still worse."

"Ah, well, no ceremony, baron; rather than give you any trouble, I will
take one of my boots for a bolster; you will give me an armful of straw,
and I shall pass a comfortable night before this fire, which will burn
until morning."

"I have thus passed many nights in the huts of charcoal burners," said
the baron, with a sigh of regret, "when I was hunting in the Black
Forest; but in fact, my friend, however bad your bed may be, you will
find it more comfortable than this floor, beaten down like a
threshing-ground."

"To-morrow morning, baron, I will myself sound the _reveille_" said the
Marquis; "but before that, let me sound the good-night." And
Létorière, taking from the wall the governor's trumpet, gave this last
flourish with such perfection, with such a bold and free hunting air,
that the baron enthusiastically cried:

"In the thirty years I've hunted, I never heard so fine a trumpeter."

"That is easily enough explained, baron; it is because you have never
heard yourself sound it. Your trumpet is so true that you cannot help
being master of this noble science. But until to-morrow,--baron,
good-night, and above all, don't dream of water, or sour wine, or empty
bottles."

"Good-night, Marquis!"

The baron called Selbitz, and ordered him to conduct his guest to the
rat-chamber already described, in which a great fire had been lighted.

Létorière, fatigued with his journey, slept soundly enough, and the
baron did the same, after having several times remarked to Selbitz and
Erhard, in giving them their orders for the next day, that it was a pity
that this young man was a Frenchman, for he was quite worthy of having
been born in Germany.




CHAPTER XII

CONFIDENCES


The next day, on rising, the baron learned from Selbitz that the Marquis
had set out at daylight with Erhard Trusches, for the woods, and had
charged the major-domo to make his excuses to the governor.

"Who would have thought, considering the reputation of the Marquis, to
find him such a hard huntsman and drinker, Selbitz? For, do you know, he
was ahead of me at table, and we valiantly emptied our tankards," said
the baron.

"Yes, my lord, and he went up to the rat-chamber with as firm a step as
if he had drunk nothing but a little whey for supper."

"Well, well," said the baron, receiving from the hands of his major-domo
what was necessary to dress himself for the chase, "well, Selbitz, we
must allow that, after all, the Marquis is a brave and worthy gentleman,
and besides, is gay enough to rejoice your heart! What good stories he
told us. . . . I wish he was going to pass several days at the castle!
for, on my faith, he's a most agreeable companion. Although there is
more than twenty years difference in our ages, we seem to be old
acquaintances; in short, if he were not an acquaintance of yesterday, I
should say--and devil take me if I know why--I should say, Selbitz, that
I feel a great friendship for him; faith, I like frank and open
characters,--there's nothing equal to them!"

After hastily eating a slice of cold venison, a porringer of beer-soup,
and drinking two pints of Rhine wine, the baron mounted his horse, and
soon reached the rendezvous which he had appointed with Erhard Trusches,
in one of the cross-ways of the forest.

He found there his huntsman, his servant, and the pack.

Erhard Trusches appeared sad and absorbed; the baron, surprised at not
seeing Létorière at the rendezvous, questioned Erhard about him.

After a moment's silence, Erhard said, with a timid and uneasy air, "Is
my lord well acquainted with his guest?"

"What do you mean, Erhard? Where is the Marquis? Did he not come with
you this morning to the wood?"

"Yes, my lord, that is why I ask you if you are sure of him. See here,
my lord, it will bring me mischief, joking last night at supper about
the blessing."

"Ah! explain yourself!"

"I mean to say, my lord"--and Erhard went on with a low and trembling
voice--"I very much fear that your guest is he who appears sometimes in
the moonlight, in the solitary recesses of the forest, to offer to
desperate huntsmen three balls, one of gold, one of silver, and one of
lead, and the whole at the price of their souls!" added Erhard, with a
gloomy and frightened air.

"So! you take my guest for the devil, then," cried the baron, shrugging
his shoulders and laughing; "your morning cup has turned your brain, old
Erhard!"

The huntsman shook his head, and replied: "My lord, explain to me how it
is that he whom you call your guest, and who has never been in this
forest before, knows it as well as I do."

"What do you mean to say?" said the baron, very much astonished.

"This morning at daylight, when I started with the Marquis, 'Master
Erhard,' said he to me, 'if you will let me take a hound, we will share
the search of the forest. I will go over the enclosures of the priory of
the Hermit's Chapel, of the Thunder-struck Fir-tree, and of the Black
Pool.'"

"He said that?" said the baron, stupefied.

"Just as I have told you, my lord, and he added: 'I have great hope of
starting a full-grown buck, for, in the woods about the Hermit's Chapel,
stags are plenty. You, Master Erhard, on your part, seek to start a wild
boar. They are always to be found in the forests of Enrichs, the
brambles are so thick. Then the baron can have his choice between the
foot of the stag or the track of the wild boar.' 'But, sir,' I said,
affrighted, 'you know our forests well, then? you have often hunted
them?' 'I have never hunted here,' he answered, 'but I know it as well
as you do. Go ahead! good luck, Master Erhard!'--and then he disappeared
in the woods, taking with him poor Moick, our best boar-hound, whom lie
will perhaps change into a lynx, or a beast with seven paws, by his
diabolical witchcraft."

The baron was not at all superstitious, but he could not comprehend what
Erhard said, and he knew him to be too respectful to joke with his
master. Nevertheless, he could not but admit that the Marquis was
endowed with such topographical knowledge as the huntsman described.

"And what have you done in the search?" he asked Erhard.

"He whom you call your guest has brought me ill-luck,--I have done
nothing."

"Nothing? how does that happen? This is the first time in two years that
you have not had game,--and on a day, too, when we are going to hunt
with a stranger!"

"Where the evil spirit can, mere mortals can't, my lord," said Erhard,
soberly. "He whom you call your guest has only to sound his trumpet, and
all the animals of the forest will come to him, as the bird comes to the
serpent."

"Go to the devil, you old fool!" cried the governor, angrily.

"I shall not have to go far for that, my lord," murmured he, in a low
voice, pointing to Létorière, who was coming out of a coppice holding
old Moick in leash.

"Long life to you, baron!" cried Létorière; "if you have a mind, you
can chase a full-grown buck, and strike him at my trap near the chapel.
By the size of his tracks, I would lay a wager that it is one of those
great deer with a white forehead and legs; the King of France has a
number like them in his forest of Chambord. I should recognize their
feet among a thousand. They have a magnificent shape."

"You have good luck, Marquis," said the baron; "you are a sorcerer."

"I am not a sorcerer, but it is your good blood-hound that deserves
credit. I owe my stag to him. As to you, my brave Erhard," added he,
turning towards the huntsman, "if you had had him at the end of your
leash you would have done what I have done. Come, baron, to horse! to
horse! It is a good league from here to my trap, and the November days
are short. Here's your dog, Erhard!" At the same time the Marquis
slipped a piece of gold into the huntsman's hand.

But he, seizing a moment when the Marquis could not see him, threw away
the piece as if it had been red-hot, and with the toe of his boot kicked
it under the leaves.

"Money of hell!" said he, in a low voice; "if I had put it into my
pocket, in a quarter of an hour, instead of a piece of gold, I should
have found a red bat or a black frog." Then the huntsman took the leash
of his hound with as much precaution as if the Marquis had had the
plague, and looked at the dog with disturbed tenderness, believing him
to be already bewitched.

After putting his thick boots over his buckskin splatterdashes, the
Marquis mounted old Elphin, and the baron saw with a new pleasure that
his guest was an excellent horseman.

"Baron," cried Létorière, arriving at an enclosure in the forest,
"here is my trap; unleash, I am going to enter the hedge with three or
four of your oldest dogs in order to attack--"

"One moment," said the baron, with a serious air; "you pass for a
sorcerer in the eyes of Erhard Trusches; he will work badly if he takes
you for the devil, for he will think more of his soul than the course of
the stag."

"How? explain yourself, baron!"

"Come here, Erhard," said the governor.

The huntsman advanced, looking agitated and alarmed.

"Is it not true," continued the governor, "that you do not understand
how my guest, who has never been in this forest, knows it so well. How
he knows that the enclosure of the Hermit's Chapel is the best haunt of
the stag, and that relays must be placed at the border of the Priory
Plain?"

"'Tis true," said Erhard in a low voice; "could not have known it so
long--"

"And devil take me if I understand it myself, Marquis," said the baron.

Shrugging his shoulders and smiling, the Marquis drew from his pocket a
little book bound in leather, and advanced towards Erhard: "Look here,
you old wild boar, here's my conjuring-book."

The huntsman recoiled from it with a look of fright.

The Marquis opened the book, and spread out on his saddle-bow a forest
map especially prepared for imperial hunting, and on which all the
enclosures, routes, paths, haunts and passes of the animals were
minutely indicated and explained.

"The map of the imperial hunting-ground!" cried the baron; "I ought to
have guessed it. There is the mystery all explained. But you must have
great insight, a rare familiarity with the chase, to be able to make
such use of it. Ah, Marquis, Marquis, you have not your equal in Europe.
To start a stag the first time that one hunts in a forest,--that is the
most skilful thing I ever saw I Do you understand now, you old fool?"
said the baron to the huntsman; "you ought to go down on your knees to
the Marquis, our master in everything."

"Yes, yes, my lord, I understand, and God be praised, for it would have
been a great misfortune;" saying these words, Erhard took his ramrod and
drew his charge.

"What are you doing, Erhard?" said the baron.

The huntsman showed the baron a black ball, on which was traced a cross,
and said to him: "At the first enclosure I should nevertheless have sent
this charmed ball into the breast of the Marquis, whom I took for the
devil; old Ralph said there was nothing like it to lay such evil
spirits."

"Wretch!" cried the baron.

"He is right," said Létorière, with the greatest _sang-froid_; "but
you have forgotten, Erhard, that it is necessary to make the charm
complete, to have three pieces of gold in your left pocket in order that
the devil cannot enter into your purse;" and the Marquis threw three
louis to Erhard, who, this time, did not bury them under the leaves.

The stag which was started was soon in full career.

It is unnecessary to describe the various incidents of this chase,
during which Létorière showed consummate skill. The animal was taken,
and the Marquis, arriving first at the death, bravely killed him with
one blow of the knife.

The huntsmen arrived at the castle at nightfall. Selbitz had as usual
made ready the bacon, the sauer-kraut, the venison, the great, the
medium, and the little tankards well filled.

As on the previous night, the baron and the Marquis did honor to this
repast; as before, they filled their pipes after supper, and established
themselves at the corner of the fireplace, while the major-domo occupied
himself with the cares of the household.

Although the baron felt subjugated by the jovial spirit and the open and
resolute character of the Marquis, he was a little vexed at meeting in
so young a man an unconquered rival either at the chase or table.

Létorière, too adroit not to divine this, contrived a brilliant
triumph for him.

The governor, who was truly interested in his guest, wished to resume of
his own accord the conversation about the lawsuit.

"To the devil with the lawsuit!" cried the Marquis. "That's my look-out
. . . If I lose my cause I shall have gained a good companion. I would
have twenty lawsuits in order to lose them in that way! But my tankard
is empty. . . . Hallo, Selbitz, hallo, you old Satan! . . . The
kirchenwasser evaporates before my thirst, as the dew before the sun."

"Poor fellow! he tries to shake it off," thought the governor. "I ought
not to let him drink alone," and the baron had his mug refilled.

"Baron, a song!" cried Létorière, very gayly. "Do you know _The
Retreat?_ They say that the air and the words were composed by one of
your old huntsmen."

"You sing it, Marquis--I will tell you if I know it."

And Létorière, having again emptied his mug, and preluded by a deep
hem--hem--or two, struck up the following song with the voice of a
Stentor:


"'Afar the trumpet peals!
The stag lies on his haunches!
Let the merry hallo sound,
'Tis a stag of ten branch--'"


"Come! join the chorus, baron. . . . Heavens! 'tis quite _apropos_
to-day."

"With all my heart, Marquis! I don't know the air, but, by Jupiter, it
is worthy of Mozart!" and the baron repeated the refrain with a voice so
powerful, that it shook the windows.

"Listen to the minor strain, baron. . . . It is as melancholy as the
last sounds of a distant trumpet in a clear night."

And the Marquis continued in a softer voice, and in a slower measure:


"'Now the star of evening
Peers above the hill;
The day hides in the forest,
All is still.
'Tis the hour of retreat,
Let the dogs be coupled quick;
Huntsmen mount and trumpets sound;
Forward your brave horses prick!
See the brown night
And the moonlight;
We will go back
Home without seeing
The huntsman in black.'"


The voice of the Marquis seemed to lose its strength as he sang these
last words, in a rhythm melancholy and almost sorrowful; his countenance
lost its joyous and careless expression, and a shade of sadness passed
over his brow, which he soon supported with his hand.

Selbitz, who was just at that moment behind his master's chair, said to
him, in a low voice, pointing to the Marquis:

"When the flower is too plentifully watered it bends on its stalk; when
the business on hand is drinking, _to-day_ is not always the son of
_yesterday._ Come, come, my lord, you will always be the _widerkom
vierge!_ Here's this Frenchman supporting his forehead with his left
hand; the intoxication of the forester-general of Hasbreck always begins
in that way; but, to do the latter justice, that is always so from the
first day."

The baron laughed with an air of proud satisfaction, and answered in a
low voice:

"What do you mean, Selbitz? He is so young . . . but notwithstanding his
youth, he is a hardy combatant. Yesterday he went ahead of me; to
contend two days in succession is too much for him. But after myself, I
do not know anybody who can equal him." . . .

"Use him up then, my lord . . . use him up, for the honor of old
Germany," . . . said the traitorous major-domo.

"Well, Marquis," said the governor, in a loud voice, "is your song
already finished? Shall we not drink to your glorious chase to-day?"

"Let's drink!" said the Marquis, holding out his tankard with an arm
that seemed heavy. . . . Then, having drank, he repeated in a low and
sad voice the last few lines of his song:


"'See the brown night
And the moonlight;
We will go back
Home without seeing
The huntsman in black.'"


"He is dull in his liquor," said the baron to his major-domo.

"He puts me in mind of Count Ralph, who, you know, monsieur, at about
the tenth bottle almost always sings the psalm for the dead," answered
Selbitz.

"Come, Marquis, to the first wild boar that we shall take!" said the
baron, wishing to strike a last blow at the Marquis's reason.

"Let's drink!" said Létorière, who began from that time to show slight
symptoms of intoxication, speaking by turns slowly and rapidly, sadly
and joyfully. "The chase, baron--'tis good, the chase . . . wine
also . . . it stupefies--it transports, gives no time for thought; and
then it makes one gay, and at last . . . but, bah! hold on, baron, I
must tell you something in confidence." . . .

"What, confidences so soon?" cried the major-domo. "That's like the
minister at Blumenthal,--but his reverence does not begin before the
eighth tankard. You remember, my lord, the good story he told us of the
jolly miller's wife of Val-aux-Primevères?"

"Hold your tongue, and listen!" said the governor; who replied aloud,
"speak, speak, Marquis! Come, let's drink to your confidences." . . .

"Well, then, baron, imagine that my lawsuit has turned my brain." . . .

"Truly, Marquis!" said he aloud. "I'm sure of it," he continued in a low
voice . . . "this poor boy wishes to drown his thoughts." . . .

"True, as that my glass is empty. . . . I wouldn't tell you this, baron
. . . but you are my friend . . . I ought to confide in you. . . . Know
that I have made a visit to my judges." . . .

"Ah, bah!" said the baron, gratified with his guest's involuntary
communicativeness, and very eager to draw from him the secret, perhaps,
of his visits. "You have seen your judges, have you?"

"Yes, baron, the first one was named . . . Spectre." . . .

"You mean to say Sphex, Marquis?"

"Sphex, or Spectre . . . 'tis all the same to me . . . but a thousand
guns! baron, I must laugh . . . although it may be at one of your
confrères . . . 'tis not my fault . . . I have as great regard for a
man learned in us . . . as for a broken glass or a foundered
horse." . . .

"Well said, Marquis! you are not made anymore than myself to breathe the
odor of worm-eaten books. . . . We love the air of the forests!"

"Figure to yourself then, baron . . . that this old Spectre--I like best
to call him Spectre, because that tells his face as well as his
name--had the insolence to ask me, at the end of a conversation of two
minutes, if I spoke Latin!"

"You, Marquis, you speak Latin!" said the baron, sharing the indignation
of his guest. "I wonder where he had put his spectacles? As if you
looked like one who spoke Latin! Did any one ever see such an impudent
old thing! What the devil did he take you for?"

"You understand that one cannot hear such things with coolness,--even
from his judge. 'Ah well,' said I to him, 'do I look like a rat that
gnaws old books? an ink-drinker? a vulgar pedant? To speak Latin! A
thousand devils! If I had not come to ask your support in my
lawsuit, . . . I would let you see how I treat those who tell me that
I speak Latin!'"

"Well said, my guest! I would have given a hundred florins to be present
at that scene," said the baron, shouting with laughter.

"Then the doctor declared to me distinctly, that he had nothing to say
about my lawsuit, and I could consider my cause as lost, because _I was
known!_ S'death, baron, I was known!!! It was too much. He had already
asked me if I spoke Latin; I could contain myself no longer, and so I
challenged him at once. . ."

"Sphex! a challenge!" cried the governor, laughing until he lost his
breath; . . . "the old ape must have looked funny! but what did he say?"

"He said nothing at all; he raised his hands towards Heaven, and
disappeared, as if by enchantment, behind a pile of great books. . . .
Then I left, not doubting that the doctor owed me a grudge, but devil
take me if I know for what, for two gentlemen can cross swords, and
still be friends notwithstanding."

"He has rare simplicity," said the governor, aside; "he little knows how
he appears."

Létorière went on. . . . "Then I had to see the councillor
Flachsinfingen. I reached his house and asked for him, and was
introduced into the presence of an old sorceress, dressed in black, who
might have passed for a female savant, so dry and thin was she. She had,
into the bargain, a Bible in her hand. 'I have business with the
councillor, and not with his wife,' said I to the lacquey. 'Me or the
councillor, 'tis all the same,' said the old witch. 'Tell me, sir, what
you have to say to my husband?' Then, baron, I, who know how to do such
things, devised a way to send off the wife and bring forward the
husband."

"Let's hear, Marquis," said the governor; adding, aside: "when he shall
become quick and adroit in such matters, I will drink pure water . . .
he is rough and knotty as an oak, but pliable as a willow. Ah, well!
what was this scheme, Marquis?"

"'A thousand devils, madam!' said I to the lady, 'what I have to say to
the councillor is not fit for your chaste ears.' 'Never mind; say on,
sir!' Then, baron, I began to recount a tale of the barracks which would
have made a Pandour blush."

At this new jest the baron had a new spasm of laughter, and exclaimed:
"A barrack-story to the prudish and devout Flachsinfingen! I would have
given--devil take me if I wouldn't--my old hound Moick, if I could have
witnessed that scene; and what did she say?"

"She blushed red as a lobster, called me insolent, and made me a sign to
go away."

"If that is the course you take to interest your judges in your cause,
my guest, I wish you joy of it," said the governor.

"And what the devil should I find to say to a learned man or to a prude?
One cannot make himself over again."

"Certainly not," murmured the baron; "the poor boy is like me; he would
find it difficult to accustom himself to the jargon of a doctor and the
babbling of an old woman."

"Then only you remained to be seen, baron. I have seen you; you are a
brave man . . . and I am afraid to bother you with my affairs. . . . But
this lawsuit . . . if you knew . . . if I lose it! I seem to be an
easy-going fellow; but look at me; if this were . . . if I lose
it" . . . said Létorière, with energy, "I will never survive. S'death!
I should pray St. Cartridge and my rifle to have mercy on me!"

Having permitted this sinister secret to escape him, Létorière
appeared to collect his ideas, passed his hand over his forehead, and
looked around him with an air of astonishment.

"Ah, well, where am I? You there, baron? Come, come, your Rhine wine is
excellent, but devilish strong. My lord, I've been asleep, I think"
. . . and the Marquis, in spite of all his efforts, lowered his eyelids,
which seemed to be heavy.

"You haven't slept, but you ought to, I think, and your cup is full."

"Then empty it for me, baron . . . for . . . the lawsuit . . . the stag
. . . to-day . . . All! to the devil with the lawsuit--_vive la chase!_
something to drink . . . to you, baron, . . ." and Létorière feigned
to become drowsy, and let his head fall on his arms.

"He refuses to drink, and I am conqueror!" cried the governor. He called
Selbitz and Erhard, as much to prove his triumph over the Frenchman, as
to order them to help his guest to the rat-chamber.

Létorière, whose head was as calm as the baron's, received their
offered aid, ascended the staircase mechanically, and fell heavily on
his mean bed.

The baron felt strangely embarrassed. If he had been profoundly
interested in Létorière, especially since the latter had made him
believe that he could not survive the loss of his lawsuit; he had also
formally promised his vote to the German princes, whose cause he truly
believed to be just.

To reconcile his desire of obliging the Marquis with his word already
given, the baron had recourse to a singular compromise: "Our votes are
secret; from what I know of Sphex and Flachsinfingen, otherwise good
partisans of the princes"--said he to himself--"both of them will
undoubtedly vote against this poor Létorière, especially after the
affront he has offered to the savant and the councillor's wife. Thus
their hostility assures the triumph of the party opposed to the Marquis.
Now, provided that the German princes gain, and thus justice be done,
what matters it whether it is owing to a unanimous vote, or a majority
of two voices against one? I desire only to be able, without being
unjust, to send this poor Marquis away with soft words and a proof of my
friendship; for I should never have the courage to say _No_ to so brave
a huntsman and so jovial a companion."

This resolution taken, the governor awaited with impatience the waking
of his guest, and announced to him, that having reflected all night on
his lawsuit, his opinion was modified, and that he would promise to vote
for him.

Létorière, having thanked the baron a thousand times, returned to
Vienna. Notwithstanding what he had told the governor, he had as yet
seen neither the councillor Sphex, nor the wife of the councillor
Flachsinfingen.




CHAPTER XIII

DOCTOR SPHEX


Doctor Aloysius Sphex lived in a very retired house, at the end of one
of the faubourgs of Vienna. Heavy bars protected all the windows; thick
plates of iron strengthened a low and narrow door, secured by a strong
lock.

One had to pass boldly between two enormous mountain-dogs, chained
behind the door, in order to reach a little interior court, where grass
was growing, and which led to the kitchen. In this cold and gloomy place
the doctor's old housekeeper was to be seen crouching near two expiring
brands.

On the first floor the doctor had a large library, dusty and in
disorder, encumbered with large folios, which seemed not to have been
opened for a long time. A high window, with small panes of glass set in
leaden sashes, and half hidden by a curtain of old tapestry, admitted a
doubtful and dingy daylight. A vast chimney, with twisted stone columns
and a sculptured mantle-piece, had been transformed into a part of the
library; for the doctor never had a fire lighted, for fear of burning
his books.

In order to guard himself against the sharp cold of the autumn, the
councillor had conceived the idea of shutting himself up in an old
sedan-chair, which had been placed in the middle of his study; closing
its glasses, he found himself comfortably established to read and write.

Doctor Sphex, a little, thin, stooping old man, with thick eyebrows,
piercing eyes, a caustic smile, projecting lower jaw, high-cheek bones
and wrinkled skin, had a singularly sardonic and malignant countenance.

When his old inlaid clock struck two, the councillor came out of his
sedan-chair, with almost automatic precision.

He wore an old rusty black coat, over which he drew a sort of gray
overcoat, placed a hat with a broad brim on his red wig, and, in order
to keep his head-dress in place, used a square handkerchief, folded
triangularly, the two ends being tied under his chin.

Putting his spectacles into one of his pockets, and into the other a
precious Elzevir, a little volume bound in black leather, Doctor Sphex
took his cane and prepared to go out.

But, as if struck by a sudden thought, he turned back, recrossed the
library and entered another room, closing the door behind him.

His eyes seemed to sparkle with joy. He took a key suspended from his
watch-chain, opened a little chest, and drew from it with religious
respect a flat and oblong cedar box. It contained a vellum manuscript in
quarto. The forms of the written characters were those used in the tenth
century; the titles and capital letters were gilt, and ornamented with
vignettes.

After contemplating this manuscript with looks as eager, uneasy, and
insatiable as those with which a miser gloats over his treasure, Doctor
Sphex replaced the box, and carefully closed the chest which contained
this precious specimen of caligraphy. Reassured of the safety of his
dearest treasure, he went out to take his accustomed walk.

In passing by the housekeeper's room, he said to her, in an impatient
tone:

"If the French Marquis comes to the charge again, whether I am at home
or not, always tell him that I am absent."

"He has been again this morning, sir."

"That's good, that's good! What need have I to see this silly coxcomb,
this spark, this beau, who, they say, _Non pudet ad morem discincti
vivere Nattœ._"[2]

The old man directed his steps to a little valley situated behind the
faubourgs, called the Vale of the Lindens.

Even as certain disdainfully exclusive amateurs acknowledge but one
school of painting, and admire but one master of that school, so Doctor
Sphex was infatuated with the Satires of Persius, and ranked him above
all other ancient Latin poets.

Not only did he possess all the editions of this poet, from the most
rare, the edition _Princeps de Brescia_ (1470), to the most modern, that
of Homs (1770), but he had, at a high price, secured the manuscript of
which we have spoken, and which he considered an inestimable treasure.

The councillor had translated and commented upon Persius, and still
studied him daily. By dint of penetrating into the mind of this author,
he had come to assimilate him so constantly in his thoughts, that he
applied, continually, to himself and others, quotations borrowed from
that satirical stoic.

This admiration bordered on monomania. Even as by the aid of a
microscope the observer discovers unknown worlds in a blade of grass or
a drop of water, so the exalted imagination of the doctor found in the
most simple words of his cherished author the most profound
significances.

The councillor proceeded, then, with slow steps towards the place of his
daily walk. Approaching the overthrown tree which generally served him
as a seat, he heard some one speaking in a loud voice. . . .

Annoyed by finding his place occupied, he stopped behind a holly-bush.

But what was his surprise, when he heard a young and sweet voice
reciting with admirable accentuation and elegant expression, these
verses from the first Satire of Persius:


"O curas hominum! O quantum est in rebus inane!" etc.[3]


The councillor held his breath, listened, and when the voice ceased, he
quickly advanced to see who was this stranger who appeared to enjoy so
much his favorite author.

He saw a young man negligently dressed, with rolls of paper thrust into
the pockets of his old black coat; beside him was a voluminous quarto.
The exterior of Létorière, for it was he, gave an instant impression
of a poor poet; a narrow cravat of coarse linen, an old felt hat, rusty
with age, a pale and half-famished countenance; nothing was wanting to
this new metamorphosis.

At sight of the old councillor, the Marquis respectfully arose.

"Ah, young man, is not our Persius the king of poets?" cried Sphex,
eagerly, striking the palm of his hand on the Elzevir which he drew from
his pocket, and approaching Létorière with a radiant air.

"Sir!" said the Marquis abashed, "I did not know" . . .

"I was there, I was there behind the holly-bush; I heard you begin the
recital of the first satire of our poet, of our god! for, by Hercules,
young man, I see that you appreciate him as I do! Never could a Tuscan
pronounce with more purity than you, the inimitable poetry of our common
hero; and truly, my old heart is rejoiced at this meeting, as happy as
it is unexpected.

"'_Hunc, Macrine, diem numera meliore lapillo!_'"[4] cried the old man;
and he cordially held out his hand to his new acquaintance, having
borrowed this quotation from his favorite author.


"If it were not too presumptuous, sir," answered Létorière, with
humility, "I should dare to answer you:"


"'Non equidem hoc dubites, amboram fœdere certo
Consentira dies, et ah uno sidere duci.'"[5]


"Bravo! my young friend, it would be impossible to answer with more
spirit, or more to the point! You must know my Persius, my inimitable
stoic, as well as I do; but what is given to you, and which, alas! I
have not, is this beautiful and harmonious pronunciation, so musical
that I am transported by it! So," added the councillor, hesitating, "if
I dared, I would ask you, in the name of our common admiration, to
repeat to me the first verses of the third satire."

"With pleasure, sir," said Létorière, smiling.


"'Hæc cedo, ut admoveam templis et farre litabo.'"[6]


"Better and better!" cried the savant, clapping his hands. "But
_apropos_ to this quotation, what signification do you give to _far?_"
and the doctor fastened an anxious look on the young man, whose
knowledge he wished to put to the proof by this question.

"According to my slender experience," unhesitatingly replied the
Marquis, "_far_ signifies the grain of which flour is made; and,
contrary to the opinion of Casaubon and Scaliger, I believe that this
word applies not only to bread, but to corn, to barley, in a word, to
all sorts of grain; for you know, sir, that _far_ was with salt, the
most common of offerings; and it is that, I think, that Virgil means by
these words, _fruges salsae . . . salsa mola_ . . . it is then as a kind
of humble offering to our common divinity, sir, that I will repeat the
verses which please you." Then Létorière kindly recited the whole
satire, giving to his harmonious voice an expression by turns so fine,
so pointed, and so energetic, that doctor Sphex, delighted, cried out:

"Nothing has escaped him! not a shade! not an idea! he has not stopped
on the surface of the words! he scrutinizes them, he examines them, he
weighs them, he penetrates through the brilliant exterior, and brings to
light the profound and hidden sense. . . . Young man! . . . young man!"
. . . added Sphex, rising, . . . "my respects to you. To read thus is to
translate! To translate thus is so to assimilate yourself with the mind
of the original as to substitute the individuality of the author for
your own! Now I declare to you, that a man so happy and so rarely
endowed as to individualize himself with Persius, deserves, in my
opinion, almost as much respect as Persius himself! Yes, I consider this
phenomenon of assimilation as a kind of relation . . . of intellectual
parentage! Now then, mark this, young man! . . . Were it not for the
immense difference in age which separates us, I should say that we were
brothers in intelligence, children of one father."

Dr. Sphex had spoken with so much vehemence and enthusiasm, that
Létorière regarded him with profound astonishment, fearing that he had
been deceived, and was talking to a monomaniac instead of the Aulic
Councillor, for whom he was waiting.

The _savant_, differently interpreting his silence, continued: "You see
I act like an old fool. . . . I treat you as a brother, and have not
thought of asking to what learned Latin scholar I have the honor of
speaking."

"My name is Létorière, sir," said the Marquis, saluting him.

"Létorière!" cried Sphex, turning away suddenly. "You may perhaps be a
relative of the Marquis of that name?"

"I myself am the Marquis of Létorière, sir."

"You! you!! you!!!" cried the doctor, in three different tones. "Come
now, that's impossible. The Marquis of Létorière is, they say, as
ignorant as a carp, and as flighty as a butterfly; he is one of those
beautiful triflers incapable of understanding a word of Latin, and who,
as to Persius, know only stuffs of that name," added the councillor,
well pleased with this detestable joke.

"I see, with pain, that I have been calumniated, sir," said the Marquis.

"Are you really, then, M. de Létorière?" said Sphex, stupefied.

"I have the honor to repeat it to you, sir," said the Marquis.

"But are you here about a lawsuit? Answer, sir, answer, and do not
deceive me!"

"Sir!" said the Marquis, as if he were shocked with the indiscretion of
the councillor.

"Pardon my vivacity, sir. . . . If I appear to be well acquainted with
what concerns you, it is because"--and the doctor hesitated--"it is
because I have some relatives in the Aulic Council, and I am informed of
all which passes there."

"Ah, well! it is true, sir, I am here, unhappily, in regard to a
lawsuit," said Létorière, sighing.

"But, my young friend, permit me to tell you that you appear very
unmindful of your business! Here you are reciting verses to the zephyrs;
. . . admirable verses, it is true, but, between ourselves, hardly the
means of gaining your lawsuit. Believe me, young man, if justice is
blind she is not deaf, and there are a thousand ways of interesting your
judges."

"Alas! sir, I have seen my judges . . . and it is because I have seen
them that I have but little hope. In my grief I ask of literature
consolation and information; I especially ask it from my favorite poet.
. . . I seek strength to wrestle against adverse fate in reading over
these verses. Do you not think, sir, that this energetic, bold and
sonorous poetry must reanimate enfeebled souls, as the warlike sound of
a clarion reanimates discouraged soldiers?"

The _savant_ was profoundly touched with the expression, at once simple
and dignified, with which Létorière pronounced these last words.

"Pardon an old man," said he, "the interest which he feels in you. But
do you not exaggerate the unkindly feelings of your judges? Have you
done everything in your power to interest them in your cause before
giving up all hope thus?"

"Those of my judges whom I have seen, sir, could have very little
sympathy with me, and I ought not otherwise to expect to interest them
in it."

"Why so, my young friend?"

"Our poet could, at a pinch, answer you, sir:"


"'Velle suum cuique est, nec voto vivitur uno.

* * * *

Hic satur irriguo mavult turgescere somno;
Hic campo indulget!'" . . .[7]


"I understand, I understand," said the councillor, laughing at the just
and malignant application of these verses. "I know it is said in Vienna
that the Councillor Flachsinfingen would have figured well enough among
the convivial gourmands of the banquet of Trimalchyon, and that the
brutal baron of Henferester would have been able to wrestle in the Roman
circus among the wild beasts. In fine, you poor student! poor poet! poor
nightingale of the sweet song I . . . what relations could you have with
this dull paunch of a Flachsinfingen, who dreams only of his table? What
could you have said to him if it were not--"


'Quæ tibi summa boni est? Uncta vixisse patella
Semper? . . .'[8]


"It is the same thing with this gladiator, this brute of
Henferester . . . whose great heavy body I cannot see without recalling
these words of our divine master:


"'Hic aliquis de gente hircosa centurionum
Dicat; quod satis est sapio mihi; non ego curo
Esse quod Arcesilas ærumnosique Solones.'"[9]


"Ah well! you will own up then, sir," said the Marquis, laughing, "that
having nothing else to say to my judges, I can hardly hope to interest
them. Alas! I am neither a huntsman nor a _gourmand._ . . . If I had
been I might, perhaps, have awakened some sympathy in my judges!"

"But all the councillors are not gladiators, nor sheep led by their
wives, my young friend." . . .


"'At me nocturnis juvat impallescere chartis.'"[10]

"Ah! sir, my greatest misfortune is not to have judges like you." . . .

"I have sometimes heard a certain Doctor Sphex spoken of," said the
councillor, casting a piercing look on the Marquis, "an old man, who is
not unlettered, who is a judge in the morning, and who devotes himself
in the evening to his favorite studies. . . ."


"'Hic mane edictum, post prandia Callirhoën do!'"[11]


"I have presented myself several times at the door of the Councillor
Sphex, sir," said Létorière, "and, if what you tell me is true, I
doubly regret not having met him, for he is perhaps the only one of my
judges whom I could hope to inspire with any sentiment of benevolence,
or from whom I might be able to claim any interest in the name of our
common tastes."

"By Hercules! young man, don't doubt it! . . . But all is not yet
hopeless. . . . I am slightly acquainted with this original Sphex; if
you will accompany me, I will do myself the pleasure to recommend you,
and even to present you to him."

"Ah! sir, how shall I ever be able to recognize and deserve this
precious favor?"

"Young man, people like you and the Councillor Sphex are rare; and you
both ought to gain by the meeting which I propose. Give me your arm, and
let us proceed."

The old man took a malicious pleasure in the surprise which he had
planned for Létorière, who did not fail to enlarge on the strangeness
and good luck of destiny, when, arriving at the door of the councillor,
the latter discovered to him his identity.

To the great astonishment of old Catherine, the doctor ordered her to
place two covers, for the Marquis could not refuse to partake of the
councillor's repast, who, alluding to the frugality of his _ménage_,
quoted:


"'. . . Positum est algente catino,
Durum olus, et populi cribro decussa farina,'"[12]


which announcement was realized in all points. An anchorite would hardly
have been contented with the dishes served in the library by old
Catherine.

The councillor, more and more enchanted with his guest, read to him his
translations and his commentaries; and, unhoped-for favor! last evidence
and proof of confidence! showed him the precious manuscript.

At sight of this Létorière manifested such a passionate and jealous
admiration, that the doctor began to regard his guest with uneasiness,
and almost regretted his imprudent confidence.

"Do you and your housekeeper live alone in this house?" asked the
Marquis suddenly, with a gloomy air, passing between his hands the
precious manuscript, as if he wished to appropriate it to himself.

"Can it be that he is so enthusiastic in his admiration of Persius that
he means to assassinate me and steal my manuscript?" queried the
councillor of himself.

But the Marquis, putting the manuscript back into his hands, exclaimed
vehemently:

"For the love of Heaven, sir, hide it, hide it! . . . Pardon a madman!"

And he ran precipitately from the room, covering his eyes with his
hands.

The councillor shut up his treasure, and found his guest seated, looking
dejected, in the library.

"What's the matter, young man?" said the savant with interest.

"Alas! sir, pardon me! At the sight of that manuscript an infamous, a
monstrous thought took possession of me . . . in spite of the holy law
of hospitality."

"You would then rob me of my treasure?"

Létorière bowed his head in embarrassment.

"Never mind, my young friend. I understand you . . . I understand you
only too well," said the councillor, heaving a sigh. "It is a great
compliment you have just rendered to our author; and if you only knew
the history of this manuscript," . . . after a moment's silence, he
added, "you would see that I ought to excuse the terrible temptation
which you have just been enabled to overcome."

Unfortunately, the confidence of the councillor stopped there.

The two friends passed the remainder of the day in a learned analysis of
the judgments of Casaubon, of Koenig, and Ruperti, on their favorite
poet. They discovered in him hidden beauties which had escaped all the
editors.

Létorière, by a happy chance of memory, raised the admiration of Sphex
almost to ecstasy, by calling his attention to the fact that this
passage in the third satire, "The lessons of the portico in which is
depicted the overthrow of the Medes," relates to Zeno, the chief of the
Stoics. In one word, in this long and learned conversation, Létorière,
admirably assisted by his memory, by the profound study which he had
recently devoted to Persius, at Dominique's recommendation, and by the
surprising flexibility of his intelligence, completely captivated Sphex.

Yet not one word of the lawsuit had been spoken on either side. The
Marquis was silent from prudence, the councillor from embarrassment;
for, however well-disposed he might be towards Létorière, he reflected
regretfully that his voice alone could not win the cause for his young
_protégé._

"What a pity!" cried the councillor, "that you will leave Vienna so
soon. We would have passed long and delightful days in ever-fresh
admiration of our god, and we would have said, like him:


"'Unum opus et requiem pariter disponimus ambo,
Atque verecunda laxamus seria mensa.'"[13]


"I feel this privation as much as you do, sir. Unhappily we must
sacrifice our pleasures to our duties." And Létorière arose.

Struck by the reserve of the Marquis on the subject of his lawsuit, the
councillor said, casting on his guest a penetrating look:

"But this lawsuit, we forget that." . . .

"The idea of thinking, sir, of sad material interests, when we are
speaking of the object of our worship to one who shares our admiration!"

"Hum! hum!" said the doctor, shaking his head; and smiling with a
caustic air, he recited these verses:


"'Mens bona, fama, fides! hæc clare, et ut audiat hospes;
Illa sibi introrsum, et sub lingua immurmurat: Oh! si
Ebullit patrui præclarum funus!'"[14]


"Yes . . . yes . . . 'one says, aloud, I forget my lawsuit; . . . and,
in a low tone, devote to the infernal gods the wicked councillor who
will not give me a word of hope.' . . . Isn't that it?"

"What do you mean, sir?" said the Marquis, smiling, and answering by a
quotation from the same book:


"'Messe tenus propria vive!'"[15]


"And you believe you have reaped indifference, young man?" said the
_savant_, laughing at this _apropos_ quotation. "Well, I will undeceive
you. . . . It shall not be said that the voice of old Sphex will not, at
least, protest against the judgment of an old tun-belly like
Flachsinfingen, or an old he-goat of a centurion, a brutal gladiator
like Henferester. In my opinion, your rights and those of the German
princes are so perfectly balanced, that a breath only would turn the
scale."


"'Scis etenim justum gemina suspendere lance
Ancipitis libræ,'"[16]


said the Marquis. "Not doubting the integrity of my judge, I have never
doubted the success of my cause before him."

Enchanted with this new quotation, the councillor cried:

"And you have done well, young man; my voice will be solitary; but thus
it will protest more forcibly against a judgment that I shall regard as
unjust, if it goes against you, as I fear it will. Adieu, then. . . .
Day after to-morrow we pronounce on your cause . . . and may the gods be
favorable to you! As for me, by Castor! I know what I have to do"--and
the doctor brought this conversation to a close by another quotation:


"'Ast vocat officium; trabe rupta, Bruttia saxa
Prendit amicus inops; remque omnem surdaque vota
Condidit Ionio! . . .'"[17]


[Footnote 2: Who is not ashamed to live like a Natta.]

[Footnote 3: With what cares is man occupied! Oh, what vanity in
life!. . .]

[Footnote 4: Mark this day, Macrinus, with a propitious stone.]

[Footnote 5: Do not doubt, the gods have wished to unite us by certain
affinities, and that we should be guided by the same constellation.]

[Footnote 6: Oh that I could bring to the temple this offering, even
barley will suffice to make my prayer heard.]

[Footnote 7: Each one his own taste; no one resembles the other; one
prefers to grow fat by the pleasures of the table and of sleep; another
prefers the hardships of the chase.]

[Footnote 8: What is the sovereign good for you? To junket every day?]

[Footnote 9: But I hear an old he-goat of a centurion reply: "I have as
much learning as is needful for me! I do not care to become an Arcesilas
or a morose Solon!"]

[Footnote 10: But for me, it is my delight to grow pale over books at
night.]

[Footnote 11: To my duties in the morning, to my pleasures in the
evening.]

[Footnote 12: The table is spread with a dish of raw vegetables, with
bread of coarse barley-flour.]

[Footnote 13: Together would we work and rest, and refresh ourselves
after toil with pleasant festivity.]

[Footnote 14: Wisdom, honor, virtue. This said aloud, so that the guest
may hear. To himself, and in a low whisper, he murmurs: "Oh, for a
magnificent funeral for the father-in-law!"]

[Footnote 15: One must live on what he reaps.]

[Footnote 16: You know, indeed, how to hold the balance of justice with
an impartial hand.]

[Footnote 17: But duty calls; a friend has been shipwrecked; he is cast
helpless on the Brutian rocks; all his property and his empty vows have
gone to the bottom of the sea.]




CHAPTER XIV

THE COUNCILLOR FLACHSINFINGEN


The next day after Létorière's visit to Dr. Sphex, there was an
extraordinary disturbance in the house of the Aulic Councillor
Flachsinfingen. It was eleven o'clock in the morning; Madame Martha
Flachsinfingen, a large woman, about forty years of age, lean, pale, and
solemn, clothed in a long brown dress, with a starched neckerchief and a
kind of loose sack of black velvet, was conversing with her husband, the
councillor, a great abdominous, rubicund man, with a jolly and simple
look.

Enveloped in a Chinese silk dressing-gown, his head covered with a
night-cap bound with a flame-colored ribbon, the councillor seemed to
listen to his wife with mingled deference and impatience.

She held in her scraggy hands a note which she was reading for the
second time, with profound attention, weighing each word.

This note read thus:


"Monsieur the Marquis of Létorière will have the honor of presenting
himself at noon, to-day, to _Madame la Conseillère_ de Flachsinfingen,
if she will deign to receive him."


After reading it, she repeated:

"'Will present himself to Madame la Conseillère.' What impudence!"

"But, Martha," said the councillor, humbly, "I don't see any impudence
in . . ."

"You don't see! oh! certainly, you are so penetrating! you don't see
that such a letter, from a libertine, from a débauché, from a
Nebuchadnezzar like this Marquis of Létorière, is worse than an
insult! for it is, so to speak, a premeditation and threat of insult!"

"How so, Martha?"

"Have you forgotten all that we have heard of this abominable man, who
leaves behind him, they say, only ruined girls and guilty wives? . . .
Don't you know that he is a Pharaoh, who thinks he can bewitch one with
a glance . . . a kind of unbridled Tarquin, who the first time he meets
a woman dares to address her in the most wicked language of gallantry?"

"The fact is, he is one of those brisk sparks whom husbands, fathers
and mothers send to the devil twenty times a day. Ha, ha, ha!" answered
the councillor, with a horse-laugh.

This fit of inopportune laughter was severely punished by the
_conseillère_, who sharply pinched him, crying:

"And are you such a wretch that you can laugh like a fool when you have
in your hand the proof that such a dissolute fellow perhaps intends to
crown his infernal triumphs by attacking the honor of your wife? . . ."

The councillor looked at his wife wonderingly, clasping his hands:

"Attack your honor; Martha! Ah, good heavens! Who thought of that?"

"Oh! what a man! what a man! Listen, then!"

And the _conseillère_ read the letter for the third time! . . .

"'Mons. de Létorière will have the honor of presenting himself to-day,
at noon, at the house of _Madame_ Flachsinfingen.'

"Do you comprehend that? At _Madame_'s house. Is not that clear? It is
not at the house of the councillor that he will present himself, but at
the house of the councillor's wife. Tis a kind of rendezvous which he
asks of me. He does not hide it; he attempts no subterfuge; he avows it
without shame; and you,--you do not trouble yourself, you stand there,
careless of the affront! Go along! go along, Flachsinfingen! you are not
worthy to have an honest wife! To ask a rendezvous of _me!_ The impudent
fellow!"

"How, Martha, do you really believe that the Marquis dreamed of it?
. . . Come, now, you are foolish and ridiculous!" cried the councillor.
"If he asks a rendezvous, it is to speak to you about his lawsuit; nothing
is more simple. He, like all the rest of the world, knows that I place
entire confidence in you; that is to say, you lead me by the nose. So,
in order to influence me, he very naturally wishes to act upon you,
Martha."

"To act upon me!! How to act upon me!! I will prevent it at the peril of
my life!" cried the _conseillère_, in heroic accents.

At this moment they heard a carriage stop at the door.

"Heavens! that is he," said the _conseillère_, leaning upon her
husband's chair. "I have not a drop of blood in my veins!
Flachsinfingen, do not quit me! In heaven's name defend me from this
audacious fellow!"

But the carriage continued on its way it was a false alarm.

Martha passed her hand over her forehead, saying with emotion:

"My heart failed me, I confess; but a woman cannot always control her
fears."

"Well, if you fear this Marquis, why the devil do you receive him? Why
do you face him?" innocently asked the councillor.

"Why? why?" repeated Martha, indignantly--and pointing towards her
husband with a gesture of sovereign contempt--"he asks me why! That is
the question of a soul shamefully abandoned to gluttony! Why? Why is the
warrior who basely flees before his enemy dishonored? Why is gold tried
by fire? Why is the just man who has valiantly fought, who has resisted,
superior to him who has never struggled? Why does the Scripture"--and
Martha pointed to her Bible, opened at the Book of Judges--"why does the
Scripture say: '_Ye who offered yourselves willingly to bless the Lord.
Speak ye that ride on white she-asses, ye that sit in judgment, and walk
without fear_--'"

"But," cried the councillor, interrupting his wife impatiently, "I tell
you again, you are a fool! Who thinks of fighting you on your she-ass?
of attacking you? of wrestling with you? of proving you by fire? At your
age, you . . . ah, bah! . . . be quiet, then. . . . You will make me say
something foolish, Martha!"

"Now add insult to vulgarity; nothing from you will astonish me."

"Well, once more, do not receive this Marquis,--do not receive him!"
cried the councillor, exasperated; "my mind is made up to sustain the
rights of the German princes, since you desire it! so whatever you may
say to this Nebuchadnezzar, this Pharaoh, this Tarquin, will change
nothing. Be quiet! I have no wish that he should attack you, as you say,
or that you should resist him in order to prove yourself the most
virtuous woman in all Germany. So don't think of it any more; close your
door, and let me go to peep into Lipper's ovens; my stomach warns me
that it is almost noon, and I depend so much on a certain baked pike,
with gooseberry jelly sauce, that I have dreamt of it all night."

Having suffered her husband to speak, Madame Flachsinfingen replied with
an air of calm and concentrated contempt: "I know, sir, that you think
of nothing but your beastly gormandizing, when the virtue of your wife
is in peril. . . . So it devolves on me to defend your honor and my own.
A new Judith, I will brave this Holofernes, and like her, I will say:"


'Give me, oh Lord, courage to scorn him and strength to destroy
him.'


"But notwithstanding my resolution," continued Martha, "as I am, after
all, but a weak woman, as this miscreant is capable of going to the most
frightful lengths . . . all that I ask of you is, to hold yourself well
armed, and ready to succor me, if my own efforts are unhappily vain!"

"But, Martha, reassure yourself . . . reassure yourself; one cannot
always judge one's self aright; and I swear to you that there is
something in you . . . a certain air . . . a certain 'I know not what'
. . . which would deter any impertinent fellow from showing a want of
respect to you. . . . So I shall have no need to arm myself in order to
. . ."

"Do you not know that if I set out to do a thing, I will do it?" said
the _conseillère_, interrupting her husband, and fixing on him a look
which seemed to fascinate him. "Although I am sorry to delay your
dinner-hour, you will nevertheless take a blunderbuss, and, concealed
under this table, will be present at this interview . . . ready to come
to my aid, if need be, when I cry, 'To me, Flachsinfingen!'"

"I hide myself under this table with a blunderbuss! And what for?
Heavens!"

"I tell you, sir, that this will be, and it will be!"

This scene took place in the councillor's library, where many arms of
the middle ages were hung up on the wainscot as objects of curiosity.

The lady selected a blunderbuss and a poniard, which she laid on the
table; she examined, also, a light Persian shield and a steel coat of
mail, and was on the point of investing herself with these defences in
order more surely to resist the expected attack of the Marquis; but,
deciding that she was sufficiently guarded by the poniard, she again
approached her husband.

"This poniard will do for me; this blunderbuss for you. Deborah was
armed with nothing but a nail; Judith, with a sword; Dalilah, with
scissors. . . . Martha will have a poniard."

"But, Martha, take care! this blunderbuss has been loaded ever since the
day I intended to try it. . . . Good heavens! what's the use of all
these implements?"

Again a carriage stopped at the gate. Once more, Martha felt a strong
emotion of terror, when the servant came to say to her:

"It is a French Marquis who asks for you, madame." . . .

"Good heavens! 'tis he . . . courage!" . . . said she, in a low voice;
and added: "when I ring the bell, Claire, you may introduce this
stranger."

The servant went out; the _conseillère_ solemnly embraced her husband,
and said to him in an agitated voice:

"Now, Flachsinfingen, the moment has come . . . take your blunderbuss;
and may God save me!" . . .

And she raised the cover, making a gesture to her husband to slip under
the table.

"But, my dear wife, I shall stifle under there. . . . How absurd!"

"Do you hear me?" said Martha, imperiously.

"But, 'tis useless . . ."

"Flachsinfingen, did you hear me?" cried the furious woman, seizing her
husband by the arm, and accentuating, so to speak, every word with a
sharp pinch.

"I must be, by Jupiter! as foolish and weak as you are mad, to lend
myself to this nonsense," said the councillor, rubbing his arm, and
painfully crawling under the table.

"Now, when I cry 'To me, Flachsinfingen!' come out, and fire without
mercy on this Philistine!" said his wife; then she drew down the cloth
which stifled the councillor's last murmurs.

Sure of this concealed auxilliary, Martha made scientific preparations
for defence. The table which sheltered the councillor was placed between
herself and the dreaded adversary. On her flanks she placed two chairs,
with another as a screen; and at her side she had a long Toledo poniard.

Then, with a beating heart, she rang her bell, and murmured in a low
voice: "Be ready, Flachsinfingen!" . . .

Some inarticulate sounds escaped from beneath the table-cloth; the door
was opened; Létorière entered, and the lady put her hand upon her
weapon.




CHAPTER XV

THE INTERVIEW


This time, also, the metamorphosis of the Marquis was complete. He
seemed to be not more than twenty years of age; his chestnut hair,
without powder, parted in the middle over his forehead, framed his
charming face, candid and ingenuous. He was clothed in black; he dropped
his eyes timidly, twirled his hat in his hands with an embarrassed air,
and remained near the door without daring to move a step.

The _conseillère_, agitated, irritated and threatening, with her hand
upon the poniard, expecting to see a bold and brilliant gentleman of
audacious mien and free speech, stood stupefied at the appearance of
this youth of such rare beauty, who, quite intimidated, seemed to
hesitate to approach her.

Hardly believing her eyes, and fearing some mistake, Martha said to him
sharply:

"Are you really the Marquis de Létorière!"

"Yes, madame _la conseillère_," replied the Marquis, with a trembling
voice, not lifting his eyes, and blushing deeply.

"Do you come from France?"

"Yes, madame _la conseillère_; I arrived here three days ago." . . .

At the sound of this sweet voice, so pure and youthful in tone, Martha's
astonishment was doubled; she dropped her poniard, leaned towards the
Marquis, and said in a milder voice:

"You are, then, the Marquis de Létorière, a party in a lawsuit?"

"Yes, madame _la conseillère_". . .

"In a lawsuit against the Dukes of Brunswick and Brandenbourg?"

"Yes, madame _la conseillère._"

Hearing these answers, almost childlike in simplicity, and stammered out
timidly, Martha, reassured, rose and took two steps towards the door,
saying to the Marquis:

"Come nearer, sir!" . . .

Létorière, for the first time, raised his great tender and melancholy
eyes, looked earnestly at the lady, and then lowered them under his long
eyelashes.

In her whole life Martha had never encountered a look at once so sweet
and so seductive; she was moved, and said to the Marquis, with a sort of
quick impatience:

"Come nearer, sir! . . . one would say that I frightened you." . . .

"Oh, no, madame _la conseillère_; you do not frighten me. . . . 'For
the virtuous woman is an excellent gift, and she shall be given to man
for his good deeds,' says the Scripture."

"He quotes Scripture!" cried Martha, with admiration, her fears quite
dispelled. "But I do really intimidate you?"

"Madame . . . it is because you are so majestic . . . you resemble so
much one of the daughters of our king, that my heart beats in spite of
myself;" and the Marquis placed his hand upon his heart with a movement
full of grace. "Mercy on me, I can hardly speak! Ah! do not wish me to
do it, madame. Self-command is impossible in circumstances like these,"
said Létorière, casting a look at once timid and imploring upon the
lady, who was flattered by the effect she produced, and by her
resemblance to one of the daughters of the King of France.

"I don't know whether I am asleep or awake," said Martha to herself;
"how is it that he has been called shameless? audacious? a pitiless
seducer? But perhaps he is playing with me! perhaps this appearance of
candor is only an abominable feint of the evil spirit! Perhaps it is
only the artifice of the tiger, who approaches his prey with soft steps,
the better to seize and devour it!"

As this suspicion took possession of her mind, imitating, to a certain
extent, in her retreat, the side-ling and stealthy step of the tiger,
she prudently regained her fortress, that is to say, the table, and said
softly to her husband:

"Prepare your blunderbuss, Flachsinfingen . . . the moment
approaches . . ."

By quick movement under the cover, it was impossible to guess whether
the councillor raised his blunderbuss or made an impatient gesture.

Once safely intrenched, with her poniard near at hand, the lady resumed
her imperious tone, her repulsive physiognomy, and said, harshly, to
Létorière:

"Well! and what do you want, sir? My husband is convinced of the justice
of the claims of the German princes, and all your efforts will be
useless."

"Adieu, then, madame, since you will not deign to hear me! I have no
longer any hope. . . . Alas! ye Fates, how unhappy I am!"

The Marquis, putting one of his hands before his eyes, turned towards
the door in profound dejection.

Noting this movement, which was far from announcing hostile intentions,
and hearing this accent of despair, the councillor's wife forgot all her
suspicions, emerged for the second time from her fortress, approached
the Marquis, and said to him in a softer voice, but which betrayed a
little pettishness:

"Who told you I would not listen to you, young man? Why are you going
away? Although the question of your lawsuit may be settled, it is my
husband's duty to listen to your claims. . . . Confide in me, then . . .
reassure yourself. Have I such a terrifying look? See, come near
me,--don't be afraid!" And thus speaking, Martha took the Marquis by the
hand and led him slowly to a scat, repeating: "Tranquillize yourself;
you must not be afraid of me any more, my child."

At this moment a burst of roaring laughter was heard, the cloth on the
table was suddenly thrust aside, and the great fat councillor appeared,
blunderbuss in hand, crying with increasing merriment:

"Where is your poniard now? where is your helmet? where is your buckler,
Martha? It is you who have to soothe this Pharaoh! this Nebuchadnezzar.
. . . Ah, ha! behold Judith calming the emotion of Holofernes!"

All this was utterly incomprehensible to Létorière, who, for the
moment, surprised by the sudden apparition of the councillor, could
hardly control the desire to laugh which the grotesque figure of
Flachsinfingen excited.

But Martha, as much irritated as humiliated by her husband's raillery at
the foolish precautions she had taken, rushed towards him angrily,
crying:

"Are you not ashamed to employ such vile means to play the spy upon your
wife? Oh, you odious tyrant! Oh, you abominably jealous man! God o'
mercy! have I ever given you cause to doubt my virtue?"

And Martha raised her eyes towards heaven to call God to witness the
injustice of the poor councillor's suspicion, who, astonished, stupefied
by such unexpected reproaches, stood with open mouth, the blunderbuss in
his hand.

"How then, my wife," said he; "you? . . ."

"I will hear nothing from you," said Martha, taking him by the arm . . .
"Leave me." . . .

"But, . . ."

"Go away, sir . . . go away . . . your presence makes me sick!" and
Martha rudely pushed her husband towards the door of a closet which
opened from the room.

"But . . . my wife!" . . . said the councillor, still expostulating.

"And before this young man, too! Heavens! what will he think of me?"
cried Martha.

"But, what the devil! . . . it is you who . . ."

"To lie in ambush there traitorously, with a blunderbuss!" added Martha.

"But really . . . my wife!"--and the councillor, losing ground, was
still pushed towards the door.

"A veritable assassin! worthy of an Italian bandit!" continued Martha,
with horror.

"Nevertheless, wife, it was you who . . ."

"An Aulic Councillor to play such a part! You disgust me! . . . go out!
. . . go out!" . . .

And after a pretty long struggle, Flachsinfingen disappeared in the
closet, of which his wife drew the bolts.

"Well done!" said Létorière, laughing inwardly at seeing himself shut
up with Martha; "it is no longer she, but myself now, who has need of
defence. . . . I don't like the presence of the man with the
blunderbuss," he added, looking round him with a frightened air.

Martha soon returned, her eyes cast down like an offended prude's.

"I am so confused at this scene, sir! . . . Alas! my husband is
unhappily jealous . . . frightfully jealous! Good gracious! without the
least reason! He is, in short, so fanciful, that, knowing I was going to
have an interview with you . . . with a young gentleman" . . . and the
lady hesitated, "whom they say; . . . in short . . . whose reputation is
such; . . . in a word . . . my husband hid himself . . . for . . . my
grief! you comprehend the rest!"

"Yes, madame, I have already been told that the councillor was very
jealous," said the Marquis, timidly.

"Ah! . . . you have been told that!"--and Martha simpered.

"Yes, madame, I have been told that the councillor was very jealous of
the influence which you exercise over his clients, who always address
themselves to you rather than to him. . . . You are known to be so good
. . . to possess such a correct judgment . . . and yet your husband
ought to bless you every day; for the Scripture says, _The husband who
has a good wife is happy, and that the number of his years shall be
doubled._" This was said with an expression of such virgin innocence,
with so gentle and pious an accent, that Martha, stupefied, after taking
a long look at the enchanting face, said to herself: "He is a true
paschal lamb. . . . Poor innocent! . . . sacred texts always in his
mind! . . . how he interests me!" . . . and she added aloud:

"Tell me how it is, that, young as you are, your parents allow you to
travel alone? How is it that they confide so important a lawsuit to your
inexperience?"

"Alas, madame, I am an orphan. . . . I am poor. . . . I have no one to
help me, and my only friend and guide is my old preceptor."

"But how is it that, pleasing as you are, you have such a reputation?"

"I, madame?" asked Létorière, with angelic simplicity, "what
reputation?"

The councillor's wife was confounded; she could easily understand that
stories had been exaggerated; but that a youth of such rare candor, and
of such a pious education, could pass for an heartless seducer, was
beyond her comprehension.

"Have you no relative of your name at the French court?" she asked,
anxiously.

"No, madame." . . .

"It is plain that the German princes have spread these injurious reports
about their adversary," thought Martha. "But tell me, what steps have
you taken hitherto?"

"Alas! most useless ones, madame. . . . I went first to the castle of
the Baron of Henferester." . . .

"Good heavens! poor child, did you venture into the den of that
frightful Polyphemus?"

"Yes, madame; oh, he frightened me so! And then . . ."

"Go on, go on! Tell me all; and in order to put you at your ease, I will
tell you that my husband and myself both cordially detest the baron."

"I did not know that, madame; that is why I feared . . . to tell
you . . ."

"No, no, tell me all!"

"Well, madame, I went to the castle of Henferester. The baron began to
ridicule me because I went in a carriage instead of on horseback."

"The wicked old centaur! . . . He thinks that everybody is like himself,
all iron and steel," said Martha, contemptuously.

"Then, when I began to speak to him of my lawsuit, he said to me in his
loud voice "'_Dinner first, . . . we can talk better glass in hand._'"

"The drunkard! I recognize him there."

"Not daring to oppose the baron, I went to the table; but at the risk of
displeasing him, as he had not said grace, I asked his permission to say
it."

"Poor little martyr! . . . Well done, my child! and the brute let you
say it, I hope?"

"Yes, madame, but he afterwards laughed so much that I felt
scandalized." . . .

"I believe it. . . . Unfortunate lamb! . . . where were you straying,
God of heaven!"

"As I ate but little, the baron said to me, 'You have dined, then?' 'No
sir,' I answered, 'but the Scripture says: _Be not eager at the
feast._'" . . .

"Well answered . . . to this glutton; my child, you might have added as
a prediction that sleeplessness, and colic, and pains in the belly, are
the inheritance of the intemperate,[18] and that is truly what I wish to
him, the wicked brute!"

"Then, madame, he gave me a great glass filled with pure wine, telling
me to pledge him. . . . 'But, sir,' said I, 'I never drink clear wine.'
Then, madame, he shouted with laughter, and answered me: 'That's no
matter . . . drink away' . . . to your mistress!'"

"To say such things to a child of that age! What abominable corruption!"
and the _conseillère_ lifted up her hands to heaven.

"I did not understand what the baron said to me; I touched my lips to
the great glass, and put it back on the table without drinking a drop.
Then the baron looked me through and through, saying, in a loud voice,
'You do not drink wine, you eat nothing, you do not talk. Perhaps you
would be more communicative between a tankard of kirchenwasser and a
pipe well filled with tobacco.'"

"Kirchenwasser! a pipe! oh, the old sinner! to want to impart his odious
barrack tastes to this youth, who seems more like a young girl than a
young man!"

"But" I answered the baron, 'I never drink strong liquors, and I have
never smoked.' . . . Then he began to swear--and how he did swear!--till
I was ashamed for him, and he said: 'You don't smoke, you don't drink; I
see that we shall not come to an understanding, for I interest myself
only in people who resemble me! At least you hunt?' 'Yes sir, I have
shot larks with a mirror.' Then, madame, he began to laugh, and to swear
harder than ever, and said: 'Young man, excuse my frankness, but the
Lord of Henferester would rather never touch wine, a bridle, or a gun
again, than to take the part of a shooter of larks. . . I can do nothing
for you.' And so, madame, I quitted the baron, and came away in utter
despair."

"And Doctor Sphex,--have you seen him?" asked Martha, thoughtfully.

"Yes, madame, but he asked me, the first thing, if I was acquainted with
profane literature . . . and a certain heathen author named Persius,
which I have been told is improper for one of my age to read. I told him
no; then he said that my cause was bad, and that my adversaries had the
right of the case. . . . So I saw that there was no more hope in that
quarter than in the other."

The _conseillère_ felt profoundly moved.

"Listen, my child!" said she; "you interest me more than I can tell you.
. . . I am pained to see the other councillors so opposed to your
interests; I can do nothing with them; all that I can do, is to endeavor
to secure for you my husband's vote." . . .

"Ah! madame, can it be true?" cried Létorière, with an expression of
the most lively gratitude. "Ah! the Scripture is right in saying: _The
virtuous woman is the joy of her husband; she makes him pass all the
years of his life in peace._ . . . Yes, madame, for I will bless your
husband, and he will be proud of having--thanks to you--made the just
cause to triumph."

"Always Scripture! he might truly be called a little clergyman," said
Martha, with enthusiasm. "But," continued she, "don't indulge in foolish
hopes, nor despair utterly; the baron and the doctor may yet revise
their resolutions." . . . And Martha added to herself: "How much it
costs me to deceive him so! He has very little chance, but I have not
the heart to undeceive him."

"Ah, madame!" cried Létorière, throwing himself on his knees, "I feel
it,--you will be my good angel. . . . To you I shall owe all the
happiness of my future life. . . . Heavens! madame, how good and
generous you are! Oh, let me here, at your feet, thank you again and
again!"

The lady, very much moved and softened, turned her head, and said gently
to the Marquis, giving him her hand to kiss . . .

"Come, come, my child, get up; don't stay there!" . . .

The Marquis, still on his knees, resolutely took the hand which she
offered to him, carried it bravely to his lips, shutting his eyes, and
saying, in a grateful and passionate voice:

"Oh, madame, how can I ever be grateful enough for all your
kindness!" . . .

"Well, well, little simpleton," said Martha, softly disengaging her
hand, and giving Létorière a slight tap with the other, "are you going
to make me repent of my kindness?" . . .

After the Marquis had thrown himself at Martha's feet, the jolly face of
the councillor, still armed with his blunderbuss, had cautiously
appeared at an oval window over the door of the closet in which he was
shut up.

Seeing his wife so little disposed to use her poniard to repulse this
Holofernes, this Tarquin, this Nebuchadnezzar, the councillor, wishing
playfully to revenge himself for his incarceration, fired his
blunderbuss in the air, exclaiming, "Martha, did you not cry, 'To me,
Flachsinfingen!'"

Then resting his elbows on the window, he began to laugh boisterously.

His wife, provoked by this new outburst of factiousness, fell in feigned
convulsions.

Létorière escaped, calling for help, and left Martha in the hands of
her women and her husband, who, seeing the unhappy issue of his
pleasantry, hastily came out to seek pardon for his impertinence.


[Footnote 18: Ecclesiasticus, XXI. 20.]




CHAPTER XVI

THE JUDGMENT


On the day of judgment on Létorière's lawsuit, the three councillor's
met at the palace. Their ballot was to be secret, the votes being
deposited in an urn.

Before the session, Henferester, Flachsinfingen, and Sphex exchanged
some cool civilities, at the same time scrutinizing each other with some
anxiety; once the doctor thought of interesting Flachsinfingen in
Létorière's favor; but he was afraid of compromising his _protégé_'s
cause instead of helping it. The others, feeling a similar fear,
concealed their intentions, and chattered about matters remote from the
lawsuit.

"This fine young man is surely going to lose his lawsuit; he will be the
victim of the unjust partiality of my associates, but my voice at least
shall be raised in his favor."

Such was the private reflection of each judge.

When the merits of the case had been set forth anew by the lawyers,
after a long session occupied in listening to, not in discussing the
facts, the three councillors arose and solemnly deposited their votes in
the urn.

The Baron of Henferester, who on that day presided over the court,
ordered the recorder to examine the ballot.

Each councillor had written on a slip of paper the name of the party
who, in his opinion, had the right of the cause.

The recorder plunged his hand into the urn, drew out a ballot, and read:
_The Marquis of Létorière._

"That is my vote," said each councillor to himself.

At the second ballot the recorder read again: _The Marquis of
Létorière._

The councillors began to look at each other uneasily.

On the third ballot the recorder again read: _The Marquis of
Létorière._

The stupefaction of the three magistrates was complete.

The recorder registered the judgment. All the judicial formalities
having been fulfilled, the councillors returned to the council-room.

Notwithstanding their joy at the Marquis's triumph, they were greatly
astonished by this strange coincidence of opinion; so they were eager
for an explanation.

"How the devil did you ever come to vote for the Marquis?" impetuously
cried the baron, addressing Flachsinfingen and Sphex.

"I was going to ask you the same question," replied Sphex. "How is it
that you decided to give him your vote? And you, too, Flachsinfingen?"

"Oh, with me it is very different," said the baron. "Between ourselves
we can speak frankly. You must admit that one founds his preferences on
similarity of pursuits; is it not so? Well, it is because my dogs and
those of the Marquis hunt together, as the saying is, that I have given
my vote to him. In a word, he is a man whose character, manners, and
habits please me. I promised him my vote, feeling that his cause was
hopeless, knowing well that both of you would be hostile to him. I am
delighted that he has gained it; but, may the devil strangle me if I can
understand how and why you voted for him!"

"The character and the habits of the Marquis please you?" cried Sphex
and Flachsinfingen, with one voice, both astounded.

"Certainly, never a bolder hunter has sounded his trumpet in our forests
. . . never a gayer companion, never a freer drinker has emptied his
tankard _supernaculum_, as the French say!"

The two councillors laughed in the baron's face.

"A bold hunter! . . . A blower of trumpets, he! a poor young Latinist! a
poor scholar!" said Sphex, giving way to his hilarity, and shrugging his
shoulders with pity.

"A hard drinker! . . . a gay companion! . . . this ingenuous youth who
quotes the Bible so _apropos!_ this timid lad who cannot look at my wife
without blushing up to his ears!" cried Flachsinfingen, with a laugh not
less sardonic.

"The . . . the Marquis! a scholar and a Latinist! . . . The Marquis
quoting the Bible and blushing before a woman!" repeated the baron,
laughing immoderately. "Ha, ha! my friends, you are fools, or rather you
see everything through your own glasses."

"You are a fool yourself, with your hunting-horns and your tankards,"
cried Sphex, angrily. "What can there be in common, I should like to
know, between the Marquis and the course amusements of gladiators and
drunkards?" added the doctor, with an expression of supreme contempt.
"You wouldn't have fallen into such an error, my dear baron, if you had
heard Létorière recite and comment upon the admirable verses of the
king of the Latin poets of antiquity!" . . .

"I!"--cried the baron in a rage--"I believe what my eyes have seen, and
not the dream of a sickly imagination! In my presence the Marquis has
killed a deer with the finest possible stroke of the knife! In my
presence he has wound a horn better than the first huntsman of the
imperial hounds! In two days he has drank, in my presence, more beer,
more Rhine wine and more kirchenwasser than you ever drank in all your
life, Dr. Sphex! In my presence he has mounted my old Elphin, which
many huntsmen have found difficult! Well, once again I tell you, you and
Flachsinfingen both, that Létorière, a rough and bold cavalier, is too
well acquainted with the spear, the hunting-horn and the glass, to lose
his time in turning pale before old he-goats, or blushing before a
woman! Again I tell you, you are two dreamers."

At this outburst the two other councillors fell foul of one another, and
the discussion soon became so violent, that the three judges, all
speaking at once, could not make themselves heard.

The presence of an usher of the council was necessary to put a stop to
this incomprehensible conversation.

The usher approached Flachsinfingen, and whispered in his ear. . . .

"Gentlemen," said he, "my wife desires to speak to me; will you listen
to her? She will inevitably throw light on this discussion, for she has
conversed for two whole hours with M. de Létorière. . . . Listen to
her, and you will see that what I have said is the exact truth."

"Let her come in, if she wishes," cried the baron. "But in spite of all
the petticoats in Germany, I repeat that I have seen Létorière kill a
deer with his own hand, and that he can drink as much as I can."

"And in spite of all the hunters, whippers-in, and drinkers in Germany,"
cried Dr. Sphex, "I maintain that I have heard Létorière recite verses
of Persius, and comment upon them more learnedly than the most learned
professors of our universities could do. And you will never make me
believe, baron, that so erudite a man, with such a refined mind, could
hunt in the forest like a poacher, or drink like a pandour."

"And I, in spite of all the professors, all the huntsmen, all the
drinkers in the empire, will maintain that I have seen Létorière
tremble like a child before my wife, who was obliged to reassure him,
and that I heard him quote Scripture as piously as a minister," cried
Flachsinfingen,--exasperated in his turn. "One need only to see the
Marquis to be assured there is nothing in his appearance or manner that
smacks of the gladiator."

The _conseillère_ entered in the midst of these contradictory
allegations.

"I doubt not, gentlemen," said Flachsinfingen, "that my wife will be
able to bring you into agreement; thus far she has been a stranger to
our discussion, and--"

But Martha did not let her husband finish; addressing the doctor and
baron with an affable and complimentary air,--

"Nothing is talked of, gentlemen, but the success of the Marquis of
Létorière; permit me to congratulate you on this unexpected unanimity
of judgment. . . . Thanks to your wise agreement, gentlemen, it may be
said that the cause of innocence and religion has triumphed! In my
opinion this poor child Létorière represents, in a wonderful degree,
innocence and religion in their moral as well as physical aspects, if I
may so express myself, for he has the look of an angel."

"There,--what did I tell you, gentlemen?" cried Flachsinfingen.

"And what devil of an angel and a child are you talking about, if you
please, madam?" asked the baron.

The lady replied, rather sharply:

"I speak, sir, of a poor child whom you know as well as I do, for you
tried to make him drink, smoke and hunt, the innocent creature! when he
went to visit you in order to interest you in his lawsuit. Oh, I know
all, _Monsieur le Baron_; but escaping from your temptations, this angel
courageously resisted; he drank water, as pure as his soul, and was not
afraid to remind you of your religious duties, which you had
forgotten . . ."

"But, zounds, madame!" cried the baron, "you don't know him." . . .

"I know all, I know all, I tell you," replied the lady, volubly; "but I
forgive you, seeing by your vote that the might of innocence has been
sufficient to overcome your unjust prejudices."

The baron was confounded, and said to himself: "If this lasts ten
minutes longer, I shall have an apoplectic fit, I'm sure of it." . . .

"But, madame," cried Dr. Sphex, "you are sadly mistaken . . . and . . ."

"And you, too, sir," replied the councillor's wife, "have given him your
vote, much to your credit! You have done well; but now tell me, how
could you believe that a youth so religiously brought up . . . so
religiously nourished on the Scriptures . . . would have stained his
chaste mind with all your abominable profane literature! Why make it a
crime in him for not knowing the verses of a certain . . . Persius . . .
who, they say, is the most shameless of satirists?"

"By Hercules, madame, it was he who . . ."

"Ah, by Hercules! What a frightful pagan oath!" cried the lady, raising
her hands towards heaven. "I know all, I tell you . . . but I will say
to you as I did to the baron: since you have dismissed your unjust
prejudices . . . and have joined my husband in helping the cause of our
innocent _protégé_ to triumph . . . all glory and honor to you!"

"My dear baron . . . my nerves are horribly shaken by this scene," said
the doctor, turning pale and seizing the baron's hands; "I am not well."
. . .

"And I, my poor doctor, I am suffocating . . . I have vertigo . . . my
head is splitting! I'm stifling . . . I need air!"

The door opened, and the ushers entered to announce that the Marquis of
Létorière begged to have the honor of saluting and thanking the
councillors. . . .

"'Tis God who sends him to us!" cried the _conseillère._ "Let him come
in . . . let him come in! the sweet paschal lamb." . . .

"Now you will see this lamb-like drinker of pure water!" said the baron,
with a sardonic laugh.

"Now you will see this enemy of profane antiquity!" said the doctor in
the same tone, joyfully rubbing his hands.

"Now you will see this Nimrod!". . . said Flachsinfingen.

"Now you will see the pearl of young men!" said Martha, with the most
profound and full conviction.




CHAPTER XVII

THE ADIEUX


Létorière entered.

The surprise of the four spectators was at its height; they stood
petrified, and looked at each other with astonishment.

The Marquis was dressed with the most remarkable elegance. He wore a
coat of sky-blue velvet, embroidered with gold and silver leaves of
extreme delicacy; his vest of silver cloth was spangled with gold, as
were also his small-clothes, of the same color as his coat; his
rose-colored silk stockings were clocked with gold; his shoes had red
heels; a sword mounted in gold, covered with ornaments of silver, most
beautifully wrought; a shoulder-knot of blue, silver, and gold, and a
chapeau, with white plumes, which the Marquis held in his hand,
completed this magnificent costume.

This complete metamorphosis had already upset all their conjectures, or
rather confounded all the recollections of the councillors and Martha;
but what still more excited their astonishment, was the impossibility of
finding in Létorière's face any of the expressions which had struck
them individually.

Thus, in this charming gentleman so magnificently dressed, with an air
at once spiritual and malicious, with such elegant manners and such
perfect grace, although it was a little effeminate, the baron could not
recognize his uncouth huntsman, so careless and _negligé_; . . . the
doctor sought in vain his learned grammarian, who looked like a
half-starved poet; and Madame Martha as futilely tried to see in the
black and brilliant eyes of the Marquis, the timid and downcast look of
the youthful quoter of Scripture.

Létorière felt the necessity of putting an end to the amazement of his
judges. He saluted them profoundly, and said:

"May I be permitted, gentlemen, here to express to you my profound
gratitude, and to declare it to each of you?"

The three Germans looked at each other in dismay, and awaited in silence
the termination of this strange scene.

Létorière advanced towards Madame Flachsinfingen. Taking her hand with
a movement of the most amiable gallantry, he raised it to his lips, and
said to her in a sweet and grave voice: "I knew beforehand, madame, that
in order to merit your interest, to reach the level of your noble
character, it would be necessary to have, like you, a pure and religious
soul . . . in showing myself to you under this exterior, I have not
deceived. I did, for a moment, borrow your language, madame; and believe
me, it is too noble and too beautiful for me ever to forget it. . . ."
And he saluted her respectfully.

"As for you, Monsieur le Baron, in order to prove to you that I am still
worthy to take part in the brotherhood of joyful huntsmen, I can do no
better way than to beg you to come next year to pass St. Hubert at my
castle of Obbreuse. . . . If you will deign to accompany him," said the
Marquis to Dr. Sphex, "we will continue our commentaries on our favorite
poet. In short, gentlemen, formerly I liked the chase, reading the
ancient poets and the Scripture merely from inclination . . . but now I
shall like them from the remembrance of your precious interest." . . .

Thus speaking, Létorière saluted the three councillors, who remained
dumb, and went out.

Radiant with this success, which made his marriage with Mademoiselle de
Soissons sure, Létorière went home, where he found a note which the
princess had sent to him by a courier:

"_The King is dying. . . . My liberty, our future, are threatened. . . .
Come! come!_" . . .

Sinking from the highest hope to the depths of anguish, the Marquis
instantly started for Paris.




CHAPTER XVIII

THE RETURN


The day of his return to Paris, just as he was taking off his boots,
getting ready to go to Versailles, in great haste to approach the king,
he was called upon by the Baron of Ugeon, a relative of Madame Soubise.
Accompanied by two seconds, this gentleman came to demand satisfaction
for the discourtesy which the Marquis had shown towards Madame Rohan
Soubise at her hotel.

Very much astonished at this revengefulness, for which there was no
reason, Monsieur de Létorière, without declining the challenge,
declared that having ridden post from Vienna to see the king, his
master, for the last time, who was said to be dying, he could consent to
fight only after having fulfilled this sacred duty.

The bravery of the Marquis was so well known, that his proposition could
not be rejected. It was settled that when he was ready for the meeting,
the seconds should inform Monsieur d'Ugeon.

After begging Dominique to go to the Abbey of Montmartre, and carry a
letter from him to the princess Julie, the Marquis started for
Versailles.

Louis XV. was dying with the confluent small-pox.

This terrible malady, so rapidly contagious, and which left such
frightful traces, had caused great alarm in the court. Létorière found
the small rooms occupied by the dying king almost deserted. The panic
was much greater, as vaccination was not then known. Even the officers
on duty were hardly to be found at their posts. Louis XV. had strictly
forbidden the dauphin and the other princes and princesses to enter his
apartment, for fear of exposing the royal family to the fatal contagion.
The Viscount of T***, one of the gentlemen of the bedchamber, then on
duty, was in the room next to that of the king, when Létorière
arrived, pale and agitated.

The Marquis, forgetting court etiquette in this dreadful moment, was
about to raise the curtain of the king's chamber, when the viscount
hurriedly advanced, and said in a low voice, laying his hand upon the
Marquis's arm:

"Stop, sir, you have not the _entrée_ to his majesty's chamber."

"It is said, sir, that the king is almost deserted by his attendants;
they fear contagion. . . . If it be true that death reigns in this
chamber, one can brave all etiquette to enter it," said Létorière,
bitterly, and he made a movement to enter.

"Once more, you cannot go into the presence of his majesty, sir,"
replied the Viscount T***. "I am not sure that he will consent to
receive you."

"Go, then, and ask him, sir; the king will not refuse the services of
one whom he has always loaded with favors."

The proposition to enter the king's chamber seemed to frighten Monsieur
T***, who haughtily answered the Marquis, still in a low voice:

"I receive orders only from the first gentleman-in-waiting, sir."

At that instant a feeble voice, well known to both who heard it, asked:

"Who is there? Who is speaking in whispers?"

"It is the king! . . . He has heard you, sir. You are responsible for
the consequences of this," said Monsieur T***; and he replied aloud:
"Will his majesty deign to excuse me if I answer him without entering?
but I only execute his formal orders. The person who is here, Sire,
is . . ."

"'Tis Létorière, who supplicates the king to be permitted to approach
him," said the marquis aloud, interrupting M. T***.

"Indeed, . . . is it you, my child? You have returned, then?" cried
Louis XV., in a tone of great pleasure. Then reflecting that he should
expose the Marquis to the danger of contagion in permitting him to enter
his chamber, he added:

"No . . . no . . . the air of this apartment is fatal . . . don't come
in; I forbid it." . . .

"For the first time in my life I shall dare to disobey an order of the
king. . . . But I have a duty to accomplish, and I will accomplish it,"
cried Létorière; and raising the curtain, he advanced towards the
monarch's bed.

"Go out . . . go out this instant, ill-fated child!" cried the prince,
raising himself to a sitting posture, and extending his hand towards the
door with an imperious air.

But Létorière threw himself on the king's hand; which, despite his
majesty's resistance, he kissed respectfully several times. Then he
knelt near the bed, saying:

"May the king pardon my audacity . . . but there is now no longer any
reason for forbidding my presence." . . .

"Go away . . . leave me;" replied Louis XV.

"Four years ago I was happier . . . the king deigned to allow me to kiss
his royal hand in the garden of Versailles," said the Marquis, with an
accent of filial veneration.

"But four years ago . . . my hand could not communicate a frightful
disease . . . death, perhaps!" said the sovereign, much moved.

The courageous pertinacity of Létorière touched more deeply this
excellent prince, because, save by some inside servants, he had been
abandoned by nearly all the courtiers.

The high officials of the crown, whose duty it was to remain near his
person, had obeyed only too faithfully his orders, which forbade them to
stay.

The fine features of the king, disfigured by his disease, already
indicated the approach of death. At this supreme moment the unfortunate
dissensions, the threatening political agitation which had darkened the
latter part of his reign, filled him with new anxieties. Létorière's
noble devotion for a moment diverted his thoughts from these painful
themes which saddened his last moments.

"You are a madman, . . . you deserve all my anger for daring to disobey
me and expose yourself thus," . . . cried Louis XV., with an expression
rather of grief than of wrath, and casting a tender look on Létorière,
who, still kneeling near the bed, kept profound silence.

"Oh, may the king have pity on me! this may perhaps be the last time I
can show him my gratitude."

"Again, I tell you this disease is contagious. . . . Do you not see that
they have abandoned me . . . that I am alone . . . that I wish to be
alone?" the prince hastened to add with bitterness, as if he wished to
disguise from himself his first thought; the devotion of the Marquis
made the ingratitude of the courtiers appear yet more shameful to him.

"Brave and noble heart!" added Louis XV., looking at the Marquis
tenderly. "That hast no fear; thou art faithful!"

"Then let the king recompense my fidelity by granting me what he grants
to no other person . . . the right to serve him, to remain near
him!" . . . said Létorière, joining his hands in supplication.

"It must be so . . . now" . . . said Louis XV. Then he added, almost in
despair: "But you are young! you are handsome! you are beloved! and all
that you risk to come to me! all that you will sacrifice to me, perhaps,
poor young man! . . . when so many others". . . and, after a moment of
silence, Louis continued: "There is probably a crowd around the dauphin
to salute the King, Louis XVI."

"Sire, what do you say?"

"That is the fate of kings when they are departing, my child. . . . Ah!
if I had only oblivion, only death to dread! But France . . .
France . . . what will become of her? And my grandson, what will his
future be?" . . .

"Sire, France has named you the _Well-beloved_; for a long time you
have borne that name, and his highness the dauphin will one day merit
it." . . .

"I am not mistaken . . . I am feeble . . . I approach my end," . . .
said the king, shaking his head sadly; "and then, I believe certain
deaths are significant; the Marshal of Armantières, the Marquis of
Chauvelin, have suddenly died before me . . . in my court. . . . It is a
warning from heaven."

"Do not think of this, Sire. This illness is dangerous, but care . . ."

"Care is powerless,--I feel it; thus it is frightful for me to think
that I have, perhaps, uselessly compromised your life . . . but now it
is too late. Your imprudence . . . no, no, . . . your generous devotion
has rendered all regret vain. . . . But tell me, I have heard with joy
of the gaining of your lawsuit. Now, nothing can prevent your marriage
with the princess Julie. . . . Oh! I have had to break many lances for
you against the _Maréchale_ and against the House of Savoy," he added,
with a kind smile. "I have been obliged to use all my authority to
prevent them from shutting up Mademoiselle de Soissons in the convent of
Montmartre."

"Ah! Sire, what goodness! you deign to think . . ."

"It is now or never; to-morrow, perhaps, it will be too late. . . . My
only fear is, that when I am gone the princess Julie will not find a
friend in my grandson. . . . But if God spares me a few days, I will
advise her; it will be sweet to me to leave you as happy as you deserve
to be, my dear child." . . .


* * * * * * *


The illness of the king made rapid and frightful progress. Létorière
did not quit him for a moment. It would be impossible to tell with what
tender, respectful, and touching cares he surrounded the dying monarch.
The sight of the Marquis seemed to calm the pains of Louis XV. Several
times he offered him his hand in silence, with a sweet expression of
gratitude. Soon all hope of saving the prince vanished, and Létorière
stood with fixed and mournful eyes at the moment of death, the end of
the sovereign who had shown for him all the affection of a father. . . .




CHAPTER XIX

THE DUEL


After the death of Louis XV., the Marquis of Létorière quitted
Versailles in order to return with all speed to Paris, and to the
convent of Montmartre, in order to see the princess Julie. Feeling, on
the road, alternate chills and fever, he attributed his indisposition to
the painful emotions which had recently agitated him. As soon as he
arrived, he questioned Dominique about the princess. The dying Louis XV.
had only too clearly foreseen the future. A provost-guard was
established in the abbey, by order of Louis XVI., to prevent Mlle. de
Soissons from going out or receiving persons who were not furnished with
the permission of Madame Soubise. So Dominique had not been able to see
the princess, or to deliver to her the Marquis's letters.

This news fell like a thunderbolt on Létorière. He doubtless trusted
much to the firmness of Mlle. de Soissons; but he also knew the immense
power of the House of Savoy, and of Madame Soubise's influence in the
new court. He was plunged in the bitterness of these reflections, when
the seconds of the Baron of Ugeon came to inquire when it would suit him
to appoint a time for the promised encounter. It seemed cruel to the
Marquis to run the risk of a duel before seeing the princess Julie; but
he had already asked for delay, and he could not beg it a second time.
He agreed, therefore, to appear with his seconds at three o'clock the
next day, behind the walls of the Mathurins farm-house, then a very
isolated spot.

The Marquis had thirty-six hours before him; in this time he hoped to
find means to obtain an interview with, or at least to convey a letter
to Mlle. de Soissons.

Dame Landry was despatched to the Abbey of Montmartre, disguised as a
pedler. She had a complete assortment of linens, cambrics, crapes,
ribbons and laces. In order to make friends with the portress, she gave
her a beautiful hood. The sister, delighted, promised to allow her to
enter the court at the hour of promenade, when the ladies would surely
make many purchases. Madelaine inquired who were the ladies of
distinction resident in the abbey. The portress named the princess
Julie.

"Is Madame Martha, Mlle. de Soisson's nurse, with her?" asked the
tailor's wife.

"Undoubtedly," replied the sister, "and you will see her in a moment,
for she almost always comes down at this hour in her mistress's
service."

"I have been recommended to Madame Martha," said Madelaine, "and I am
sure that, under her countenance, I shall sell a great many things to
the princess; I have here a piece of lace which would not be unworthy
the dress of a queen;" and the tailor's wife, unfolding a napkin, showed
a magnificent pattern to the portress.

"Ah! splendid! How beautiful that is! The archbishop has nothing finer
on his surplice when he comes to officiate here."

"And it is very probable," said Madelaine, "that the princess may buy
this marvel to make a present to his lordship; at least that's what the
person said who recommended me to Dame Martha."

"Here she comes, now," said the portress.

Martha entered, looking sad and mournful.

"Here's a pedler who has been recommended to you, Madame Martha," said
the portress. "She has the most beautiful laces in the world."

"I have no need of them," said Martha, impatiently. "But, madame," . . .
said Madelaine, hesitating, and trying to make a signal of intelligence
to the nurse, "I have been told that the princess . . . wished to
purchase some laces, and . . ."

"You have been deceived, or rather you wish to deceive me, my friend,"
sourly replied Dame Martha. "You have the appearance of one of those
travelling vendors, who never return to see if people are satisfied with
what they have bought."

"You would not confound me with those miserable creatures, madame," said
Madelaine, redoubling her signals of intelligence, "if you knew who the
person is who has recommended me to you."

"And who is it?"

"The Marquis of Létorière." . . .

At this name Dame Martha exchanged a rapid and meaning look with
Madelaine. The two women understood each other. The portress was
ignorant of the name, and even the existence of the Marquis.

Nevertheless the nurse, not wishing to excite her suspicions by
recognizing too soon the name, replied roughly:

"Seek other dupes, my friend; I don't know this Marquis." . . .

"He is, nevertheless, the nephew of the Abbé de Vighan," replied
Madelaine.

"The nephew of the Abbé de Vighan! . . . that's very different,"
answered the nurse; "why didn't you tell me that sooner? The nephew of
M. de Vighan would recommend none but honest persons. And what have you
to sell?"

"This piece of lace." And Madelaine cast an expressive glance on Martha.
"It is very precious and beautiful from one end to the other; the
princess may unroll it, and she will not find a defect in it."

"I will go and show it to her. . . And have you nothing else?"

"I have nothing that is worthy of your mistress."

"Wait, then; I will come back."

Inside the package of lace was a letter from the Marquis, inquiring of
Julie the means of penetrating to her presence. Mlle. de Soissons
answered that she considered herself his wife before God, that she was
resolved to flee from the abbey, if she could by any possibility escape
the surveillance which was maintained over her. She could go at all
hours to pray in the chapel. This chapel was separated from the garden
of the cloister by a long subterranean passage. A part of the wall
looked out upon the fields; by scaling at it one point which Mlle. de
Soissons designated, might be reached in the garden, by the side of a
fountain, the door of this subterranean passage. By forcing this door
one could gain the chapel. Mlle. de Soissons informed Létorière that
every night, at one o'clock, she would wait there, to swear to him at
the foot of the altar to be only his, and to concert with him a plan of
fleeing to England and escaping the persecutions of her family.

The princess Julie put this hastily-written letter into the roll of
lace, and Martha carried it back to Madelaine, telling her that the
princess thought it not fine enough.

Informed of Mlle. de Soissons's determination, the Marquis sent Jerome
Sicard to examine the locality. The walls of the cloister were very
high, but surrounded by desert marshes. They could easily be scaled.
Unhappily, the preparations indispensable to this enterprise would not
permit the Marquis to attempt it until the night of the next day.

For the first time he feared death, for he reflected that his duel must
precede his interview with Mlle. de Soissons.

He passed a night of painful agitation. His sleep was troubled by
strange dreams. When he arose, he felt feeble and depressed. For the
first time it occurred to him that perhaps he was a victim to contagion
and his devotion to Louis XV. In fact, his physician recognized the
alarming symptoms of confluent small-pox; but the disease would not be
developed before the next day. Moved by an over-nice sense of honor, and
contrary to the advice of his two seconds, the Marquis, notwithstanding
his weakness, insisted on fighting with the Baron of Ugeon that very
day.

At quarter past three, the meeting took place. The friends of the
Marquis, seeing his feverish color and his weakness, believed it their
duty, without consulting Létorière, to appeal to the courtesy of M.
d'Ugeon, and request him to put off the duel. But a cruel and offensive
word from M. d'Ugeon, at the suggestion of this new delay, having
rendered an adjustment impossible, the combat began. Létorière fenced
with superior force; his bravery was unquestionable; but the rapid
approach of disease had weakened him so seriously, that he lost all his
advantages, and received a sword-thrust directly in his breast. The
seconds carried him home, and left him to the care of poor Dominique.




CHAPTER XX

THE ABBEY


Eleven o'clock had just struck in the cloisters of the abbey of
Montmartre. The night was stormy; the heavens gray and veiled,
notwithstanding the brightness of the moon, which peeped out at long
intervals beneath dank clouds rent by the wind. In order to reach the
chapel, Mlle. de Soissons was obliged, after leaving her apartment, to
cross an open gallery, whose arches opened on one of the interior courts
of the abbey.

In the midst of this court was the tomb of the Countess of Egmont, the
charming and unhappy daughter of Marshal Richelieu. The princess Julie
had received, by the aid of her nurse and Dame Landry, a message from
Létorière. He announced to her that he should endeavor to introduce
himself into the abbey that very night. It was eleven o'clock; Mlle. de
Soissons, oppressed by inexplicable presentiments, was praying on the
steps of Madame Egmont's tomb. At any moment the Marquis might arrive by
the subterranean passage. The silence was profound, and interrupted only
by the groaning of the wind which whirled through the arches. Despite
her resolution, despite the noble and religious purpose which dictated
her action, and the purity of her soul, the princess Julie was almost
frightened at having given a rendezvous to Létorière in the chapel of
the abbey. It seemed to her a sacrilege. Little by little her terrors
ceased, giving place to anxiety and devouring uneasiness.

A lamp burning in the chapel threw a dim light upon the gloom. Mlle. de
Soissons, kneeling near the door which communicated with the
subterranean passage of the cloister, listened eagerly on that side.
Presently steps were heard, the lock was broken, and Létorière
appeared before the princess, who could not repress a cry of surprise
and love.

"At last it is you! . . . I see you again . . . my friend!" . . . cried
she with delirious joy; and added immediately: "But come into the
gallery; let us leave this holy place."

When the light of the moon permitted the princess to see the Marquis,
she was struck by the pallor of his countenance. He was enveloped in a
brown cloak, and walked with difficulty. In spite of his wound received
that very day, in spite of the progress of the disease, and the tears
and supplications of Dominique, the Marquis, accompanied by Jerome
Sicard, had succeeded in scaling the walls of the Abbey.

"I see you once again, Julie!" said he, with an accent of inexpressible
tenderness. . . .

"Soon nothing shall separate us again, my friend!" said the princess,
extending her hand towards the Marquis.

"My hand! . . . no . . . no . . . just heaven! . . ." cried
Létorière, withdrawing in affright; and he wrapped himself more
closely in his cloak.

Mlle. de Soissons, profoundly astonished, looked at him in silence.

"Julie . . . Julie . . . pardon me . . . if I thus withdraw myself from
you . . . but hearing of the illness of the king, and that he was
abandoned by all . . . I went to him; I did not quit him for an instant,
until his death." . . .

"Ah! I understand," cried the princess. "This terrible disease is
contagious, and your devotion will perhaps cost you your life . . . will
cost us, perhaps, our happiness!"

"No, no, reassure yourself, Julie . . . all hope is not yet lost. . . .
Although suffering, I wanted to see you to relieve you of all anxiety,
to tell you that my lawsuit is gained . . . and that no obstacle now
opposes our happiness." . . .

"None . . . none but death, perhaps!" exclaimed the princess, in
despair. "My God! . . . My God! . . . in what frightful apprehension am
I obliged to live!"

"Calm yourself! . . . Madelaine Landry will try every day to bring news
of me to Martha. . . . You see . . . I am not seriously sick, although I
may become so" . . . said the Marquis, with a feeble voice.

"I cannot live in such anxiety," replied the princess. "I will flee with
you . . . this very night."

"Julie . . . it is impossible . . . nothing is prepared for such a step.
In the name of Heaven, listen! . . . Do not compromise our future by
precipitation." . . .

"But I can see that you are suffering horribly; I will not leave you in
such a state . . . it is impossible! Energy and courage will not fail
me; where you have passed, I will pass. . . . Once away from here, I
will go and put myself under the protection of the Judge of Solar; they
will not dare to snatch me openly from the asylum I shall have chosen in
the house of the Ambassador of Sardinia. But at least there . . . every
day . . . every hour . . . I shall hear news from you."

"Once again, Julie . . . it is impossible!" said Létorière, hardly
able to stand, and leaning against one of the pillars of Madame Egmont's
tomb.

"And you believe," resumed Mlle. de Soissons, feelingly, "you believe
that during five years I could have followed you step by step with all
the solicitude of a mother . . . that I could have bravely struggled
against the wishes of my family, to abandon you to-day, under I know not
what pretext of propriety, suffering, almost dying. . . . No, no, this
love is too pure and too holy to fear to show a bold front."

"Julie . . . pardon me," murmured Létorière, falling on one of the
steps of the tomb. "I have not told you all."

"Heavenly Father! . . . he is ill!" . . .

"Silence! . . . Julie . . . one last prayer . . . let me feel your lips
on my forehead."

"He is going to die! he is dying! Charles! . . . Charles!
Charles!" . . . cried the princess despairingly; and throwing herself on
her knees by the Marquis, still so tightly enveloped in his cloak that
Mlle. de Soissons sought his hand in vain.

"I have not told you . . . that the Baron of Ugeon challenged me,"
murmured Létorière, with a voice growing rapidly weaker.

"A relative of the _Maréchale!_ . . . They have assassinated him! . . .
traitorously assassinated him!"

"No. . . . I fought . . . this morning . . . with him . . . it was
honorably conducted . . . and I received . . . in the breast . . . a
wound . . . Julie . . ." added the Marquis, faintly. "I wanted to see
you again. . . . Adieu! . . . This ring . . . you know . . . you will
take it again. . . . _Your look has followed me everywhere_ . . . EVEN
UNTO DEATH. . . . My God! . . . pardon me! . . . I thought myself strong
enough to live until to-morrow. . . . Julie . . . once more . . .
Adieu." . . .

And Létorière died as he uttered this last word.


*  *  *  *  *  *  *


These lines are to be found in the "Souvenirs of Madame la Marquise de
Créquy":

"The princess Julie, poor unhappy child, never again saw her charming
friend M. de Létorière. . . . His wounds reopened, and all the blood
that remained in his veins flowed out during the night. . . . He expired
without aid, and the next morning was found dead on the flag-stones of
the cloister.

"Perhaps it was on the stone which covered the tomb of my poor friend
Madame d'Egmont. Having been educated at the convent of Montmartre, she
had begged to be buried near Madame de Vibraye, her friend from infancy,
and Superior of this house."

They hushed up this horrible affair. The corpse was magnificent; it was
wrapped in a winding-sheet. They carried him to his bed, and it was
reported that "the Marquis of Létorière had died of small-pox."

*  *  *  *  *  *  *

*  *  *  *  *  *  *

*  *  *  *  *  *  *

*  *  *  *  *  *  *

Some years after, the princess Julie married a prince of Saxe-Coburg.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Marquis of Letoriere, by 
Marie Joseph Eugène Sue

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MARQUIS OF LETORIERE ***

***** This file should be named 63852-0.txt or 63852-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/3/8/5/63852/

Produced by Laura Natal Rodrigues at Free Literature (Images
generously made available by Hathi Trust.)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

